GEvose

1

Table of Content
Letter from the Chairmanship

2

Letter from the CEO

4

Management’s review

6

Management’s statement

24

Independent auditor’s Report

25

Financial statements of the Parent Foundation
Income statement and statement of comprehensive income for the year
1 January – 31 December
Balance sheet at 31 December
Statement of changes in equity at 31 December
Cash flow statement for the year ended 31 December
Notes

27
28
29
30
31
32

Consolidated financial statements Novo Nordisk Foundation Group
Income statement and statement of comprehensive income for the year
1 January - 31 December
Balance sheet at 31 December
Statement of changes in equity at 31 December
Cash flow statement
Notes

36
37
38
40
41
42

Annex A

96

Annual Report 2023

2

Letter from the Chairmanship
Benefitting people and society
On behalf of the Board of the Novo Nordisk Foundation, we are
pleased to present this Annual Report for 2023, which reports on the
activities across the entire Group.
The Novo Nordisk Foundation is categorised as an enterprise foundation, being a non-profit organisation that supports philanthropic activities using funds that derive from its ownership of and investment in
companies and other financial assets.
Thus, the Foundation’s annual level of grant giving is determined by
the financial results of our subsidiary holding and investment company,
Novo Holdings A/S. Novo Holdings is the controlling shareholder of
the companies in the Novo Group, Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes
A/S (now Novonesis), while managing an investment portfolio with a
long-term return perspective.
The Foundation’s vision is to contribute to research and development
that improves the lives of people and the sustainability of society and
the planet.
Points of focus in 2023
In 2023, we continued to execute on our plan for philanthropic activities towards 2030. The plan provides a clear thematic framework and
direction for our grant activities, which revolve around three focus areas: improving people’s health, advancing the sustainability of society
and the planet, and strengthening Denmark’s life science ecosystem.
During 2023, we have supported scientific research and development
efforts in all three areas – through open calls and through initiatives
launched in partnership with others.
Within health, we continue to have a focus on cardiometabolic diseases, which constitute a growing challenge globally. The activities we
support span research, prevention, treatment and education.
In addition to this, we are supporting efforts to combat infectious diseases. Thus, besides the Pandemic Antiviral Discovery initiative, which
we started in collaboration with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
and Open Philanthropy in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, we
launched the ambitious Novo Nordisk Foundation Initiative for Vaccines and Immunity (NIVI) in 2023.

Another growing health threat is anti-microbial resistance, which studies suggest will lead to as many deaths as cancer by 2050. Both the
Foundation and Novo Holdings have for a number of years been engaged in a range of activities, from supporting early drug development
to advocating for payment models that can help rejuvenate the market
for antimicrobials.
Health challenges like these are adding to the wider problem of inequity in health, which is something the Foundation is seeking to address,
both through our support of medical research and through social and
humanitarian development projects.
As human health and planetary health are closely interlinked, advancing sustainability is high on our agenda. Contributing to the green transition of society, the Foundation supports the development of innovative and scalable technologies that are based on biological solutions
and can help us to tackle climate change and lead to sustainable agriculture and food production.
Seeking to advance knowledge as well as innovation and solutions that
may benefit people and society, we continue to support the entire life
science value chain from fundamental research to initiatives that bridge
the gap between basic discoveries and their clinical or industrial application.
2024 and beyond
2024 is a special year, as the Novo Nordisk Foundation is celebrating
its 100th anniversary. Our legacy – including August Krogh’s strong
sense of scientific and societal responsibility – is something we will
continue to honour in the years to come. While the level of grant giving
was limited in the beginning, our philanthropic activities as a foundation have continued to expand in Denmark as well as internationally.
The increase in our grant giving is made possible by the financial results of Novo Holdings. In 2023, especially the strong results delivered
by Novo Nordisk A/S have contributed to the continued growth within
the Group. But looking at the entire portfolio of assets and investments,
we feel there is reason to be optimistic about the coming years.

3

Annual Report 2023

We would like to take this opportunity to thank the Novo Group’s
Boards of Directors, committee members as well as managements and
employees across the entire Novo Nordisk Foundation Group for their
contributions in 2023.
On behalf of the Board of Directors,

Lars Rebien Sørensen
Chair

Lars Henrik Munch
Vice Chair

4

Annual Report 2023

Letter from the CEO
Activities in 2023
2023 was another busy year for the Foundation. We reached DKK 7.7
billion in grants and a further DKK 1.4 billion was approved for philanthropic investments through our balance sheet. A total of DKK 9.1 billion.

under our Research Infrastructure Programme, while DKK 97 million
was awarded under the RECRUIT Programme, targeted researchers
within the natural and technical sciences. In 2024, we will extend the
scope of RECRUIT to also include biotechnology and sustainability, allocating a total of up to DKK 200 million.

Grants in open competition
The Foundation received an impressive number of high-quality applications for ambitious and innovative projects in 2023. A total of 3,109
applications were submitted, of which 751 received a grant.

The Foundation also continues to offer a range of other grants in open
competition, both within our focus areas health, sustainability and the
life science ecosystem, but also covering education, social and humanitarian efforts as well as art and art history.

Among our grants given in open competition are grants under the recurrent Challenge Programme, targeted research projects that address
major societal challenges. This year, we funded seven projects at a total of DKK 378.7 million within themes relating to human health, climate change mitigation and sustainability.

Major initiatives within human and planetary health
The fight against cardiometabolic diseases such as diabetes, obesity
and cardiovascular disease is central to our efforts within human
health. In 2023, we continued our support for the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research (CBMR) at the University of
Copenhagen, with a grant of up to DKK 1 billion.

Through our Pioneer Innovator and Distinguished Innovator Programmes, we aim to nurture innovation from basic scientific ideas to
maturation of discoveries with commercial potential. From focusing
exclusively on health, the scope of both programmes was extended in
2023 to also include sustainability and, for Pioneer Innovator grants,
AI. The Foundation supported a total of 38 grants under these two programmes, at an amount of DKK 73 million.
Another way in which the Foundation seeks to advance innovation in
research is through our Interdisciplinary Synergy Programme. The purpose is to support interdisciplinary high-risk and high-gain projects at
various stages, while helping to build bridges across national borders
and scientific fields. In 2023, we supported 16 grants at a total of DKK
128.5 million.
Under the Research Leader Programme – one of our most ambitious
programmes in open competition – 37 researchers from Denmark and
other countries received a total of DKK 361 million in grants. The programme targets the best and most talented researchers at different
stages of their careers and aims to generate new knowledge and solutions related to societal challenges within health, disease and sustainability. Research themes in 2023 covered endocrinology and metabolism, clinical and translational research, bioscience and biomedicine,
biotechnology as well as data science.
Seeking to boost Danish life science and strengthening Danish universities in the international competition, the Foundation continually offers grants for research infrastructures and for the recruitment of talented and leading researchers from abroad. In 2023, we gave out DKK
158 million for the establishment of world-class research infrastructure

Another key area for the Foundation is to contribute to the development of vaccines to combat serious infectious diseases. One of our biggest initiatives last year was the launch of the Novo Nordisk Foundation Initiative for Vaccines and Immunity (NIVI), to which we committed up to DKK 1.8 billion. Focusing on understanding how to generate
immunity in the airway itself, the aim is to develop a means to block infections and prevent respiratory diseases such as tuberculosis and influenza from spreading between humans.
We also continued our support of efforts to drive innovation in the fight
against drug-resistant infections, which is turning into a global health
crisis. Among other things, the Foundation committed up to USD 25
million to CARB-X, a global non-profit partnership that supports product developers in moving promising drug candidates to early clinical
trials.
Innovation within cell therapy is an area of medicine with vast potential. In 2023, we committed up to DKK 950 million towards the establishment of The Novo Nordisk Foundation Cellerator, a world-class facility for the development and upscaling of cell therapies for testing in
humans. A key partner in the initiative is the Novo Nordisk Foundation
Center for Stem Cell Medicine (reNEW), a research consortium established in 2021, to which Cellerator will be a natural extension, focusing
on translating breakthroughs in cell therapy research into real-world
treatments for people with chronic diseases.
To advance sustainability, the Foundation joined forces with the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation to set up a consortium of companies and
universities for creating a sustainable source of proteins for food

Annual Report 2023

production without involving agricultural land use. Exploring the possibility of converting CO2 into acetate that can be used to produce proteins, the project addresses two global challenges: supplying nutritious
food to a growing world population and mitigation of climate changes.
Social and humanitarian initiatives
In line with the Foundation’s plan for our philanthropic activities until
2030, our various social and humanitarian initiatives revolve around
equity in health and fighting non-communicable diseases. One of our
most ambitious development projects in 2023 was the launch of Partnership for Education of health Professionals (PEP), which focuses on
strengthening the education of health professionals in low- and middle-income countries through global partnerships. PEP was initiated in
India but will also be implemented in Kenya and East Africa.
Partnerships
Common to many of the societal challenges we are seeking to address
is that they require collaboration on an international level, given their
scale and complexity. Thus, an increasing number of our activities
these years involve partnerships with research institutions, governments, other foundations as well as local and global organisations.
Mads Krogsgaard Thomsen
CEO

5

6

Annual Report 2023

Management’s review
management of cardiometabolic diseases, the Foundation will focus on decreasing the burden and threat of infectious diseases, on
advancing and applying regenerative medicine and reducing inequity in health.

The Foundation’s purpose and vision
The Novo Nordisk Foundation is an independent Danish enterprise
foundation. It supports philanthropic purposes with the aim of improving people’s health and the sustainability of society and the planet, using funds deriving from its ownership of and investment in companies
and other financial assets. Its history dates back to 1922, when Nobel
Laureate August Krogh was awarded the rights to produce insulin in
Scandinavia by the Insulin Committee in Toronto.

»

Within Sustainability, the Foundation aims to advance knowledge
and solutions to support the green transition in society. Strategic
themes include the development of sustainable and high-yield
agriculture, sustainable food for healthy diets, high-impact climate
change mitigation technologies as well as supporting society in
the green transition.

»

Within the Life Science Ecosystem, the Foundation’s mission is to
invest in scientific research, education and innovation to enable a
world class life science ecosystem. Strategic themes include advancing fundamental research, enabling research infrastructures
and technologies, strengthening the translational capacity and societal impact of life science and furthering education and science
capital.

Under its Articles of Association, the Foundation has the following philanthropic objectives:
»

To support physiological, endocrinological, metabolic and other
medical research

»

To support research hospital activities within diabetes in Denmark

»

To support other scientific, humanitarian and social purposes.

Mission and strategic goals for the Foundation’s
activities
To fulfil its vision, the Foundation pursues a two-pronged mission relating to its corporate as well as its philanthropic activities.
Corporate mission
» To be an engaged owner of Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes
A/S
» To generate attractive investment returns on the Foundation’s assets
» To make strategic investments with the main goal of supporting
the Foundation’s strategy
Philanthropic mission
The Foundation’s philanthropic mission is manifested in the Foundation’s 2030 Strategy, which was adopted by the Board of Directors in
2022 and sets the direction for how the Foundation wishes to contribute to society towards 2030.
The 2030 Strategy contains three focus areas for the Foundation’s philanthropic activities: Health, Sustainability and the Life Science Ecosystem, each containing a number of underlying strategic themes.
»

Within Health, the Foundation aims to progress research and innovation in the prevention and treatment of cardiometabolic and
infectious diseases, regenerative medicine and equitable health
outcomes. In addition to strengthening prevention and

While maintaining Denmark as its centre of gravity, the Foundation is
engaging in an increasing number of philanthropic activities with an international scope.

Grants awarded
In the period 2019-2023, the Novo Nordisk Foundation has awarded
DKK 34.4 billion through more than 3,440 grants.
Of these, 42% (DKK 14.4 billion) were awarded for physiological, endocrinological, metabolic and other medical research, while 2% (DKK 0.6
billion) and 56% (DKK 19.4 billion) have been awarded for research
hospital activities within diabetes and other scientific, humanitarian
and social purposes, respectively.
For further information, please see the Novo Nordisk Foundation’s reporting on its grant-awarding policy, categories, grants and initiatives in
”Benefitting people, society and the planet – Novo Nordisk Foundation
Grant Report 2023”, https://novonordiskfonden.dk//app/uploads/Novo-Nordisk-Foundation-2023-Annual-Impact-Report.pdf,
provided in accordance with Section 77b of the Danish Financial Statements Act.

7

Annual Report 2023

Organisation and governance of the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Group is comprised of the Novo
Nordisk Foundation (the Parent Foundation), the companies in the
Novo Group as well as the life science companies in which Novo Holdings A/S has invested and holds majority ownership. The Foundation
receives dividends from Novo Holdings A/S, which are used to award
grants to society.

Novo Holdings A/S manages the Foundation’s commercial activities
within the framework defined by the Foundation’s Board of Directors.
The Novo Group is comprised of Novo Holdings A/S, Novo Nordisk
A/S and Novozymes A/S. The Foundation’s Board of Directors constitutes the Annual General Meeting of Novo Holdings A/S and thereby
approves Novo Holdings’ Annual Report as well as elects the Board
members of Novo Holdings A/S.

Novo Holdings A/S’ income stems from:
»

Dividends from Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes A/S as well as
participation in their share buy-back programmes

»

Returns on its Life Science and Capital Investment Portfolios

In organisational terms, the commercial activities and the grant-awarding activities are managed separately. In organisational terms, the commercial activities and the grant-awarding activities are managed separately.

Through its majority ownership in Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes
A/S, the Foundation maintains – via Novo Holdings A/S – a controlling
interest in these companies. The Foundation’s Board of Directors has
formulated clear principles for the Foundation’s engaged ownership in
the Novo Group. These principles have been codified into a document
together with Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes A/S.
The Novo Nordisk Foundation manages the grant-awarding activities,
for which the Board of Directors determines the grant-awarding strategy, just as the Board makes the grant decisions.

The Foundation’s Board of Directors draws up the charter for the Novo
Group and determines the overall financial strategy and investment
framework.

Figure 1 - Organisation and cash flows in the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group in 2023

Note: Novo Nordisk A/S, Novozymes A/S and Novo Holdings A/S make up the Novo Group and are among the most significant research-based companies in Denmark’s life
science cluster.

Annual Report 2023

8

The Novo Nordisk Foundation finances its grants through returns from
Novo Holdings A/S. The Foundation’s Board is required to ensure a
reasonable consolidation through appropriate allocations, so that,
among other things, the Foundation can participate – to the extent the
Board deems this necessary – in future capital increases in Novo
Nordisk A/S and Novozymes A/S or other companies in which Novo
Holdings has substantial ownership.

Novozymes A/S uses and delivers innovation to the market and
launches new, significant platforms that create value for the customers,
helping them to improve their performance while saving resources, energy and reducing their environmental impact.

The Foundation’s Board has implemented a Code of Conduct containing a set of principles that describe the conduct expected of employees, Board members, committee members, persons financed by the
Foundation’s grants as well as persons and organisations that collaborate with the Foundation and Novo Holdings A/S.

On 29 January 2024, it was announced that the combination of Novozymes and Chr. Hansen was successfully completed with the continuing name Novonesis.

The Code of Conduct covers areas such as discrimination, data security, abuse of funds and general working conditions. The Code of Conduct is supplemented by a whistleblower scheme. For further information on these, see https://novonordiskfonden.dk/da/code-of-conduct/ and https://novonordiskfonden.dk/da/whistleblower/. 1

Novo Holdings A/S
Novo Holdings is a holding and investment company that manages the
assets and wealth of the Novo Nordisk Foundation, one of the world’s
largest enterprise foundations. The purpose of Novo Holdings is to improve people’s health and the sustainability of society and the planet
by generating attractive long-term returns on the assets of the Novo
Nordisk Foundation.
Novo Holdings is the controlling shareholder of Novo Nordisk and Novozymes* (the Novo Group companies) and manages an investment
portfolio with a long-term return perspective. Novo Holdings invests in
life science companies at all stages of development and, in addition,
manages a broad portfolio of equities, bonds, real estate and infrastructure assets as well as private equity investments.

Novo Nordisk A/S
Novo Nordisk has for more than 100 years been translating the unmet
medical needs of people living with a serious chronic disease into innovative medicines and delivery systems, like insulin pens. With their
treatments, millions of people living with diabetes, obesity, and rare
blood and endocrine diseases are benefiting.
The purpose is to drive change to defeat serious chronic diseases, built
upon their heritage in diabetes, done by pioneering scientific breakthroughs, expanding access to medicines and working to prevent and
ultimately cure the diseases they treat.
Novo Nordisk is headquartered in Denmark and employs more than
64,000 people in 80 offices around the world, and market products in
170 countries.

Novozymes A/S
Novozymes is the world leader in biosolutions, producing a wide
range of enzymes, microorganisms, technical and digital solutions,
which among other things help their customers add new features to
their products and produce more from less. To fulfil its objective – to
find biological answers for better lives in a growing world –

1

These documents do not form part of the Management’s review.

The company has its headquarters in Denmark and by the end of 2023,
it employed 6,756 people.

9

Annual Report 2023

Novo Nordisk Foundation:
Financial results, grants and payouts
Financial results
The Foundation's financial results for 2023 showed a profit of DKK
4,500 million, compared to DKK 34,664 million in 2022. The decrease
is due to dividends from Novo Holdings, which decreased from DKK
38,000 million in 2022 to DKK 0 in 2023. Proceeds from the joint investment portfolio was up from DKK -3,014 million in 2022 to DKK
3,950 million in 2023.
Total equity amounted to DKK 35,047 million in 2023, of which DKK
15,000 million can be committed to grant-awarding in 2024.
Table 1. Key figures and financial ratios for the Novo Nordisk Foundation
(DKK million)

Dividend from Novo Holdings A/S

2023

2022

0

38,000

Profit for the year

4,500 34,664

Grants, net

7,594

7,144

Share capital Novo Holdings A/S *)

2,142

2,142

Joint investment portfolio with Novo Holdings A/S

31,490 26,657

Loan to Novo Holdings A/S

23,584 30,044

Total assets

57,659 58,914

Total equity

35,047 38,141

Grants payable

22,522 20,702

Equity ratio

60.8%

64.7%

*) Novo Holdings is valued at historical cost.

The Novo Nordisk Foundation’s financial activities are carried out and
administered by Novo Holdings A/S, which has an investment portfolio valued at DKK 201 billion as of 31 December 2023. The market
value of the shares in Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes A/S amounts
to DKK 913 billion as of 31 December 2023, as stated in the Management’s review in Novo Holdings’ Annual Report for 2023.
The ratio of cost was 6.8% relative to the Foundation’s payouts and
4.9% relative to grants, net. The corresponding figures for 2022 were
7.1% and 5.2%, respectively. The rate of cost is calculated based on the
Foundation’s administrative costs (see notes 1 and 2 in the parent foundation’s Annual Report) and includes, among other things, employee
salaries, equipment, rent, consultancy fees, travel expenses and fees
for committee and board members.

The rate of cost also includes a service level agreement with Novo
Holdings A/S, which, provides services to the Novo Nordisk Foundation on accounting, facility management, IT and financial activities. In
return, the Novo Nordisk Foundation provides Legal, P&O and Communication services to Novo Holdings A/S.
Salaries and fees in 2023 amounted to 4.2% of grant payouts and 4.9%
of grant awards. The corresponding figures for 2022 were 3.5% and
2.6%.

10

Annual Report 2023

Grants and payouts
Figure 2 shows the development in the Foundation’s grants and payouts in the period 2019-2023.
The Foundation’s grant-awarding has increased from DKK 4,893 million in 2019 to DKK 7,691 million in 2023. In 2023, grant adjustments
amounted to DKK 97 million. 2023 net grant-awarding from the Foundation amounts to DKK 7,594 million.
During the period, the Foundation’s annual grant payouts have grown
from DKK 3,611 million in 2019 to DKK 5,834 million in 2023. In 2024,
the Foundation expects grant awarding to increase to around DKK
10,150 million, while grant payouts could reach up to DKK 7,700 million. The Foundation’s grant awards in 2023 went primarily to universities, hospitals and other research institutions in Denmark and the Nordic region, to new research, as well as humanitarian and social purposes.

In 2023, the DKK 7,691 million that was granted for purposes in accordance with the Foundation’s Articles of Association has been distributed as follows:
»

43% (DKK 3,299 million) for physiological, endocrine, metabolic
and other medical research;

»

57% (DKK 4,392 billion) for other scientific, humanitarian and social causes.

For further information on awarded grants, please see the list of grant
recipients for 2023. The list provides the names of recipients as well as
awarded amounts and is submitted to the Danish Business Authority
simultaneously with this Annual Report.

Figure 2 – Grants and pay-outs of the Novo Nordisk Foundation, 2019-2023 (DKK million)

10,000
9,000
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0

2019

Grant awards

2020

Grant pay-outs

2021

2022

2023

11

Annual Report 2023

Highlights and financial results within the
Novo Nordisk Foundation Group
The key figures and financial ratios for the Foundation must be seen in
context of the financial development within Novo Holdings A/S, Novo
Nordisk A/S and Novozymes A/S.

The Novo Nordisk Foundation Group
Highlights
Operating profit within the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group increased
by 87% in 2023, from DKK 61 billion in 2022 to DKK 114 billion in 2023.
The Group’s total assets increased by DKK 91 billion to DKK 573 billion
in 2023, and its total equity increased by DKK 39 billion to DKK 283
billion. The number of employees within the group rose from 74,196 in
2022 to 81,652 in 2023.
In conclusion, the financial performance in 2023 had strong performance from Novo Nordisk, Novozymes and Novo Holdings. The result
is above the initial expectations for 2023.

Novo Holdings A/S
Financial results
Since 2000, where Novo Holdings A/S began to establish its portfolio,
mainly by investing in Danish companies, the investment activities
have accelerated considerably. Today, Novo Holdings A/S is an international investor within the area of life sciences, with investments in
more than 170 companies, mainly in Europe and the United States. In
addition to its life science investments, Novo Holdings A/S also has
capital investment activities, in order to ensure adequate cash resources with competitive returns and a suitable risk profile.
Life science investments
Novo Holdings A/S carries out its life science investments in companies within six areas:
»

»

•

Principal Investments carries out investments in well-established
and profit-making companies with leading positions in attractive
market segments and strong underlying growth drivers. The objective is to ensure long-term value creation and diversity in the investment portfolio.

»

Seed Investments develops and finances innovative biotech and
life science companies in the Nordic countries through direct investments, and also assists the Novo Nordisk Foundation in connection with its awarding of Pre-Seed Grants. Investments under
the Pre-Seed Programme are made on commercial terms, i.e. in return for ownership in the companies.

The value of life science investments increased from DKK 98 billion in
2022 to 103 billion in 2023.
Capital investment activities
Concurrently with its investment activities in life science companies,
Novo Holdings A/S has for more than 10 years expanded its capital investment activities, building a broad global portfolio. The main objective of the capital investments is to build a solid liquidity reserve that
generates high returns and mitigates the risk by diversifying the Foundation’s assets. The investment portfolio comprises listed and unlisted
securities in the form of shares, bonds, real estate and infrastructure assets. By the end of 2023, the value of capital investments was DKK 98
billion. The Novo Nordisk Foundation’s share amounted to DKK 31 billion.
Financial key figures and ratios
Net profit for the year in Novo Holdings A/S amounted to DKK 25 billion in 2023, against DKK 7 billion in 2022.
Table 2. Key figures and financial ratios for Novo Holdings A/S* (DKK million)

2023

2022

Dividends Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes
A/S

9,831

7,603

Gain from sale of shares in Novo Nordisk A/S

8,776

6,948

Return from Life Science Investments

5,075

-6,424

Return from Capital Investments*

7,560

-5,057

Share capital in Novo Group Companies

6,844

3,332

Life Science Investments

102,770

97,699

Growth Investments carried out its first investment in 2019 and invests in companies that have recently reached, or are close to
reaching the commercial stage, and that exhibit a high growth potential.

Capital Investments**

98,257

83,128

Total equity

152,734

127,303

Total assets

210,521

186,248

Net profit for the year

25,431

6,642

Bioindustrial Investments was established as a distinct investment vertical at the end of 2022, and invests in areas where biotechnology can deliver returns and improve planetary health.

Equity ratio

73%

68%

For more information, see Novo Holdings A/S’ Annual Report 2023: https://assets.novoholdings.dk/novo-holdings-2023-annual-report.pdf

•

»

Asia Investments was established as in 2021, and is working
closely with the other investment verticals at Novo Holdings in
the Asia Region

Venture Investments is an active international partner in the life
sciences venture industry.

* Including the Foundation’s share of return of joint investment portfolio.
** The Foundation’s share amounted to DKK 31.5 billion.

12

Annual Report 2023

Novo Nordisk A/S

Financial results
Operating profit increased by 37% measured in DKK and by 44%
measured in local currencies, to DKK 102.6 billion, within the range of
the most recent expectation of a 40-46% increase for 2023 (measured
in local currencies).
Sales of products for the treatment of diabetes and obesity rose by
38% measured in DKK to DKK 215.1 billion. Novo Nordisk A/S is the
world’s leading company in the field of diabetes treatment, with a
global value market share of 33.8% – the corresponding value market
share was 31.9% this time last year. Sales of Rare Disease products decreased by 19.7% measured in DKK and amounted to DKK 17.2 billion.
Read more about Novo Nordisk A/S’ financial results in Novo Nordisk’s
Annual Report 2023, pp. 34-36.

Financial key figures and ratios
Table 3. Key figures and financial ratios for Novo Nordisk A/S (DKK million)

2023

2022

Net sales Diabetes and Obesity care

215,098

156,412

Net sales Rare Disease

17,163

20,542

Net sales total

232,261

176,954

Net profit

83,683

55,525

Total equity

106,561

83,486

Total assets

314,486

241,257

Operating margin

43%

42%

Equity ratio

34%

35%

For more information, see Novo Nordisk A/S’ Annual Report 2023: https://www.novonordisk.com/investors/annual-report.html
Novo Nordisk A/S Annual Report. Note that the consolidated revenue within the
Novo Group is not eliminated above.

13

Annual Report 2023

Novozymes A/S

Financial results
In 2023, sales amounted to DKK 17.9 billion, corresponding to a 2% increase measured in DKK and a 5% organic growth. Organic sales
growth in 2023 was led by strong double-digit growth in Bioenergy
driven by innovation and supported by expansion of cornbased ethanol production in Latin America and growth in solutions for biodiesel
production and biomass conversion. Growth was further supported by
a solid development in Household Care driven by innovation and penetration of enzymatic solutions in emerging markets. The macroeconomic situation in 2023 with higher inflation and rising interest rates
impacted consumer demand and led to inventory adjustments many
food-related industries, having a negative impact on the food-related
parts of Food, Beverages & Human Health, Grain & Tech Processing
and Agriculture, Animal Health & Nutrition.
EBIT before special items of DKK 4.6 billion in 2023 was on par with
2022, while the EBIT margin ended at 25%, down from 26% in 2022,
corresponding to the most recent expectations of an EBIT margin at
25-26%.
Read more about Novozymes A/S’ financial results in Novozymes’ Annual Report 2023, pp. 53-64.

Financial key figures and ratios
Table 4. Key figures and financial ratios for Novozymes A/S (DKK million)

2023

2022

Revenue

17,899

17,553

Net profit

3,039

3,686

Total equity

14,351

14,228

Total assets

28,391

27,983

EBIT margin

25%

26%

Equity ratio

51%

51%

For more information, see Novozymes A/S' Annual Report 2023: https://investors.novozymes.com/investors/financial-reports/annual-reports/default.aspx
Novozymes A/S Annual Report. Note that the consolidated revenue within the
Novo Group is not eliminated above.

Annual Report 2023

Outlook for the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group
The outlook for the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group is closely linked
to the outlook for the subsidiaries in the Novo Group as well as the developments in the international financial markets. The outlook for the
subsidiaries in the Novo Group is described in more detail in the companies’ Annual Reports for 2023 – see the links on pp. 11-13.
Business related and financial risks
The most significant risks for the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group are
linked to those of the Novo Group. The Foundation follows an overall
financial strategy where the policy for managing the Foundation’s financial and investment risks is defined.
Within Novo Holdings A/S, the main risks are associated with investments in companies. In addition, there are risks connected to investments in securities which depend on the development in the financial
markets.
Novo Nordisk applies a dual-lensed approach to risk management.
This means that Novo Nordisk identifies and mitigates both operational risks that pose a threat to the short to medium-term plans, as
well as strategic risks that could reduce the ability to achieve the corporate strategy over the long term.
Read more about Novo Nordisk A/S’ risk management process on
pages 41-42 in the Novo Nordisk Annual Report for 2023.
Novozymes operates in a global environment across many industries,
which means that Novozymes’ business is exposed to different risks.
Novozymes has a risk management framework in place to identify, assess, and mitigate business risks that may impact Novozymes’ ability to
grow Novozymes’ business sustainability and be a reliable partner to
Novozymes’ customers and the communities Novozymes operates in.
Read more about Novozymes A/S’ risk management process on pages
39-45 in the Novozymes Annual Report for 2023.
Prospects for the Novo Nordisk Foundation’s and Novo Holdings A/S’
results
The Novo Nordisk Foundation’s result is contingent on Novo Holdings
A/S’ result, and this especially includes the results for Novo Nordisk
A/S and Novozymes A/S, from which Novo Holdings receives dividends. In addition to this, Novo Holdings A/S expects to participate in
any of the two companies’ share buy-back programmes, for the purpose of increasing its revenue and facilitating further grant-awarding
activities for the Novo Nordisk Foundation.
Novo Holdings A/S expects that in 2024, the long-term economic
tendencies within the life sciences area will remain positive, and that
this will form a basis for continued consolidation and development of
investments within Novo Holdings A/S’ focus areas. Novo Holdings
A/S expects to deliver returns on par with capital markets. Combined
with the expected income from the Novo Group companies as described above, Novo Holdings A/S’ expectations are to deliver positive
income and returns, as well as operating profit in 2024, on par with
2023.
The Group’s results are primarily contingent on the development
within Novo Nordisk A/S, which for 2024 expects a 18-26% increase in
sales and 21-29% increase in operating profit.

14

Annual Report 2023

The Novo Nordisk Foundation Group’s corporate social responsibility
The Foundation’s Board of Directors has a clear focus on societal impact as an integrated part of the Foundation’s grant-awarding policy
and commercial activities. The Foundation Group defines its corporate
social responsibility in terms of initiatives that benefit society, whether
economically, scientifically, socially, in terms of health, resources or in
relation to the climate or the environment. It also encompasses initiatives that contribute to a healthy and inspiring work environment with
development opportunities for employees in the entire Group. In accordance with Section 99a and 99b of the Danish Financial Statements
Act, an account of the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group’s corporate social responsibility is provided in Annex A.
Annex A contains a section on the Novo Nordisk Foundation’s corporate social responsibility as well as a section summarising the social responsibility for the respective companies in the Novo Group. Novo
Nordisk A/S and Novozymes A/S publish their own CSR reports, containing, among other things performance measurements and results in
accordance with the Danish Financial Statements Act. Novo Nordisk
A/S include information on their social as well as environmental responsibility in their Annual Report, and Novozymes A/S provide a supplement to its Annual Report. Novo Holdings A/S include information
about its policies in relation to responsible investments and their ESG
responsibility in their Annual Report. The three annual reports are
available at: https://assets.novoholdings.dk/novo-holdings-2023-annual-report.pdf, https://www.novonordisk.com/investors/annual-report.html and https://investors.novozymes.com/investors/financialreports/annual-reports/default.aspx.
Diversity policy in the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group
Section 99b of the Danish Financial Statements Act requires that Danish companies of a certain size report on diversity.
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Group welcomes and promotes diversity among its staff, managements and boards, as diversity in relation to
gender, age, education, cultural background and international experience helps to ensure a broad range of skills, which in turn contributes
to development, renewal, and quality in work efforts. Furthermore, it
lays the foundation for an inclusive culture with respect for individuals,
ongoing personal development, health and safety. Diversity is promoted through the recruitment and development processes in the
Group.
In 2023, the Board of Directors of the Foundation approved a new version of the 2019 diversity policy for the Novo Nordisk Foundation and
Novo Holdings A/S. The Foundation Group’s two commercial companies have formulated their own diversity policies in line with the Foundation’s policy.
Novo Nordisk Foundation diversity and inclusion policy is available at:
Diversity-Policy_December-2023.pdf (novonordiskfonden.dk)
Novo Nordisk A/S: www.novonordisk.com/sustainable-business/esgportal/principles-positions-and-policies/diversity-inclusion-policy.html.
Novozymes A/S: https://www.novozymes.com/en/about-us/positions-policies

15

Diversity policy for the Novo Nordisk Foundation and Novo Holdings
A/S
The diversity policy reflects the core values of the Novo Nordisk Foundation and Novo Holdings A/S. The policy sets the goals, defines the
scope and provides guiding principles for the work with diversity. The
Novo Nordisk Foundation and Novo Holdings A/S follow international
standards and procedures and in some case take a lead. The diversity
policy is an important part of the decision-making process related to
recruitments, to ensure diversity across all departments. In 2023, the
joint Personnel and Organisation department between the Novo
Nordisk Foundation and Novo Holdings A/S were split into two departments with one for each entity. The Foundation’s Impact department provides diversity analyses on recruitments and on the grant-giving and commercial activities, including their measured effects. The
Novo Nordisk Foundation collaborates with the Danish universities to
promote diversity, for example in relation to employees fully or partly
funded by the Foundation’s grants.
The foundation continuously strives to be an attractive and flexible
workplace where all employees can grow, develop, and realise their
professional potential in a collaborative and inclusive manner. Our existing workforce represents a rich diversity of educational backgrounds, industry- and sector experiences and differences in nationalities, genders, and ages. This ensures that a variety of perspectives is
brought to the table, which is key for future success of the foundation.
During 2023, Novo Nordisk Foundation launched an aspirational target
of achieving a balanced gender representation across all managerial
levels with a minimum of 40% of the underrepresented gender across
our Board and our Executive Leadership Team by the end of 2027.
https://novonordiskfonden.dk/en/diversity-policy/
By the end of 2023, our gender distribution amongst the Foundation’s
employees is considered gender balanced with 60% females and 40%
males. Our leaders directly referring to C-level (CEO) consist of 37 %
female leaders and 63% males, which means that we at this level already now live up to our target. The gender distribution in our Board of
Directors is currently at 29% females and 71% male. The composition
of the Board of Directors met the gender diversity requirements set
out in Danish legislation.
Efforts are being made continuously to be able attract more female talent. Based on the guiding precipice in the diversity policy adopted by
the Board of Directors of the Novo Nordisk Foundation, the Foundation will in 2024 continue the work that supports the development towards more diversity.
Beyond gender diversity we value and monitor diversity in teams
more broadly. When we look at our age and nationality distribution, we
have 23 % of colleagues coming from other countries than Denmark
and a great representation across four generations.

16

Annual Report 2023

Table 5. Gender diversity in the Novo Nordisk Foundation
2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

6

6

6

6

7

33%

33%

33%

33%

29%

Target
(2027)

Board of Directors
Total number of individuals
Underrepresented gender (pct)

40%

Top management*
Total number of individuals

1

1

1

1

1

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

15

15

17

17

19

40%

40%

29%

29%

37%

Total number of individuals

159

187

131

167

202

Underrepresented gender (pct)

45%

45%

19%

40%

40%

Underrepresented gender (pct)

40%

Management levels**
Total number of individuals
Underrepresented gender (pct)

40%

All employees
NA

*) Top management (CEO), **) Management levels are (C-level and all managers referring to the C-level)
Diversity in Novo Holdings A/S
During 2023, Novo Holdings A/S launched an aspirational target of
achieving a balanced gender representation across all managerial levels with a minimum of 40% of the underrepresented gender across the
Board and Executive Leadership Team by the end of 2025.
By the end of 2023, the gender distribution amongst Novo Holdings’
employees is considered gender balanced with 40% females and 60%
male. Our leaders directly referring to C-level consist of 33 % female
leaders and 67% males. The gender distribution in Novo Holdings’
Board of Directors is currently at 33% females and 67% male. Efforts
are being made continuously to be able attract more female talent.
Based on the guiding precipice in the diversity policy adopted by the
Board of Directors of the Novo Nordisk Foundation, Novo Holdings
A/S will in 2024 continue the work that supports the development towards more diversity.
Data ethics in the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group
Section 99d of the Danish Financial Statements Act requires that Danish companies of a certain size report on their policy on data ethics.
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Group welcomes and promotes ethical
use of data. In 2020, the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group initiated the
work on formulating policies on data ethics for each of companies in
the group. In 2023, the focus was on training to secure compliance with
the principles of the policies.
Novo Nordisk Foundation
The Novo Nordisk Foundation complies with both Danish and EU law
on data and privacy protection. In addition, the Foundation recognises
that the fast pace of technological development, along with evolving
risks and benefits from large scale data use, requires thoughtful and responsible decision-making where existing laws and regulations do not
necessarily provide clear ethical guidance. The Foundation has developed a policy on data ethics based on six principles for how to handle
data in an ethical way. The rules describe how the Novo Nordisk

Foundation must use and process both personal data and non-identifiable (e.g., anonymised, aggregated, non-personal) data as well as data
and information that applicants submit when applying for a grant using
the Foundation’s application system. Read more at: https://novonordiskfonden.dk//app/uploads/Novo-Nordisk-Foundation-2023Annual-Grant-Report.pdf.
Novo Holdings A/S
To cope with the challenges that arise from the fast-moving technological development, along with evolving risks and benefits from large
scale data use, Novo Holdings has developed a policy on how to use
and handle data in an ethical way. Read more at: novoholdings_policyon-data-ethic.pdf
Novo Nordisk A/S
In 2021, data ethics principles were enhanced and will be implemented
through policies and trainings across the organisation in 2023. The
data ethics principles support ethical decision-making when using data
across the value chain. The integration of data protection and human
rights risks into the business ethics risk management processes has
been further strengthened. Read more on: Data ethics | Novo Nordisk
data ethics principles.
Novozymes A/S
Novozymes has adopted a policy, which sets the overall principles for
the ethical management of data in Novozymes and supplements our
general commitment to integrity and compliance. In 2023, the focus
has been on how to use Artificial Intelligence (AI) in an ethical way. Link
to data ethics report 99d-Statutory-report-on-data-ethics-for-AnnualReport-2023.pdf (q4cdn.com).

17

Annual Report 2023

The Foundation’s Board of Directors, committees, panels and Executive
Management
Board of Directors
The Board in 2023
The Foundation’s Board of Directors consists of ten members: Seven
members are elected in accordance with the Foundation’s Articles of
Association, and three members are Group employee representatives,
currently from Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes A/S. At least two of
the members elected under the Articles of Association have a medical
or natural science background. Two members elected under the Articles of Association are independent and the Chairmanship is independent in relation to Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes A/S. The
Chair of the Board also serves as Chair of the Board of Novo Holdings
A/S.

now of three members from the Board. The Board of Directors has
adopted a charter that sets out the framework for the Committee’s
work.
The Committee is comprised of Lars Rebien Sørensen (Chair),Lars
Henrik Munch and Nana Bule Sejbæk. The Nomination Committee assists the Board of Directors with the task of reviewing the competency
profile of the Board, nominating candidates for election to the Board as
well as reviewing Novo Holdings A/S’ nominations for its Board of Directors. The Nomination Committee further assists the Board of Directors with nominating candidates for entities in which the Foundation
has appointment rights.

Chairmanship
The Chair and the Vice Chair of the Board of Directors constitute the
Foundation’s Chairmanship. The Board has adopted a charter that sets
out the framework for the Chairmanship’s work.

Scientific Advisory Group
In December 2021, the Scientific Advisory Group (SAG) was decommissioned as a board committee. The two members of the former SAG
have had a formal advisory role in relation of the appointment of new
committee members until Q1 2023.

Recommendations on good foundation governance
In accordance with Danish law, The Committee on Good Foundation
Governance has prepared a set of recommendations on foundation
governance, which foundations with corporate interests must address.
If there are recommendations that the foundations do not comply with,
this must be accounted for in their annual report (the “comply or explain” principle).

Art Committee
In 2022, the Board of Directors appointed an Art Committee with the
purpose of building a collection of important artworks over a number
of years to inspire employees of the Foundation and visitors alike. The
Committee is comprised of two members, of which one is Vice Chair
Lars Henrik Munch.

The Novo Nordisk Foundation follows all recommendations except
the recommendation on the election period for board members. The
Committee recommends that board members be elected for a minimum period of two years and a maximum period of four years. In
2004, the Foundation’s Board of Directors decided, with the approval
of the authorities, to change the election period for members elected
under the Articles of Association from three years to one year. The
Board deems that an election period of one year better allows for coordinating the succession in the boards of the whole Novo Nordisk
Foundation Group.
For a description of the Foundation’s degree of compliance with the
individual recommendations, see: novonordiskfonden.dk/en/about-the-foundation/recommendations-on-foundation-governance/
For Novo Nordisk A/S, Novozymes A/S and Novo Holdings A/S, which
are all covered by Section 99b of the Danish Financial Statements Act,
key figures have been defined for the respective Boards of Directors.
Diversity
In September 2023, the Board adopted a revised Diversity policy including to set a target of at least 40% of the underrepresented gender
across our Board of Directors, our Executive Management and at our
Senior Vice President level by the end of 2027.
Nomination Committee
In 2017, the Board of Directors appointed a Nomination Committee
consisting of two members from the Board. In September 2023, the
Nomination Committee was expanded with one member and consists

Communications policy
The Board of Directors has adopted a communications policy with
guidelines for the Foundation’s external communication, including instructions on who can and should act as public spokespersons for the
Foundation and in relation to what subject matters. More specifically, it
has been decided that the Chair will serve as spokesperson of the
Board and speak on behalf of the Foundation in relation to its commercial activities. The CEO will represent the Foundation in relation to
grant-giving policies and strategies that have been adopted by the
Board, and in connection with all operational matters concerning the
Foundation’s activities. Employees with leadership responsibilities
may serve as public spokespersons on matters that fall within their
area of expertise, including grants and publications.
Remuneration
In March 2023, the Board of the Foundation approved to raise the annual fee to DKK 416,000 for board members, DKK 832,000 for the Vice
Chair and DKK 1,664,000 for the Chair. The fee for the Chair of the
Nomination Committee is DKK 208,000, while the other members of
the Nomination Committee will receive DKK 104,000. The fee for
members of the Art Committee is DKK 104,000.
In September 2023, the Board approved to implement a travel allowance of EUR 5,000 per Board and/or Board committee meeting, if a
member has one to five hours of air travel each way to such meeting;
and of EUR 10,000 per Board and/or Board committee meeting, if a
member has five or more hours of air travel each way to such meeting.

18

Annual Report 2023

Table 6. Board fees, Novo Group 2023 (DKK)

Position

Novo Nordisk Fonden

Novo Holdings A/S

Novo Nordisk A/S

Novozymes A/S

1,664,000

1,794,000

2,265,000

1,566,000

Vice Chair

832,000

1,196,000

1,510,000

1,044,000

Board member

416,000

598,000

755,000

522,000

Chair

Table 7. Remuneration to Board members within the Novo Group 2023 (DKK thousand)

Medlem
Lars Rebien Sørensen

Novo Nordisk Fonden Novo Holdings A/S Novo Nordisk A/S Novozymes A/S Committees
1,664

1,869

Other

Total
3,741

208

208

Marianne Philip

208

Steen Riisgaard

416

Lars Henrik Munch

728

Stig Strøbæk*

416

Ole Jakob Müller*

416

Lars Henrik Fugger

453

125

578

Liselotte Højgaard

416

125

541

Mads Boritz Grøn*

416

Nana Bule Sejbæk

416

Christopher A. Voigt

566
6,115

1,271

939

2,626
951

223

416
416

416
442

26

566
3,140

707

939

10,901

Note: Lars Rebien Sørensen: Chair of Novo Holdings A/S, Chair of the Nomination Committee. Lars Henrik Munch: Member of the Nomination Committee, the Art Committee
and member of the Novo Nordisk Foundation Humanitarian and Development Advisory Panel, HUMDAP for the first half year of 2023. Steen Riisgaard: Vice Chair of Novo
Holdings A/S and Chair of the Board of New Xellia Group A/S. Lars Henrik Fugger: Scientific Advisory Q1, , and member of the Novo Nordisk Prize Committee. Liselotte
Højgaard: Scientific Advisory Q1, member of the Novo Nordisk Prize Committee.
Lars Rebien Sørensen holds shares in Novo Nordisk A/S, Novozymes A/S and Thermo Fisher. Lars Henrik Munch holds shares in Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes A/S. Steen
Riisgaard holds shares in Novo Nordisk A/S, Novozymes A/S and Xellia. Lars Henrik Fugger holds shares in Novo Nordisk A/S, Novozymes A/S and Chr. Hansen A/S. Mads
Boritz Grøn holds shares in Novo Nordisk A/S. Stig Strøbæk holds shares in Novo Nordisk A/S. Ole Jakob Müller holds shares in Novo Nordisk A/S and Chr. Hansen as well
asoptions in Novozymes A/S.
*Employee-elected members of the boards within the Novo Group donate most of their board fees to the Employees’ Honorarium Foundation (the Board members will receive
10% of the gross amount).
Lars Henrik Munch was elected Vice Chair of the Board on 31 March 2023 replacing Marianne Philip who stepped down. Nana Bule Sejbæk and Christopher A. Voigt were
elected as new members of the Board on 13 March 2023.

19

Annual Report 2023

Table 8. Members of the Novo Nordisk Foundation Board of Directors, 2023

Name, position, title, year of Date of accesbirth, gender
sion
Lars Rebien Sørensen
Chair
MSc (Forest and Nature
Management) and a HD-IB
1954
Male

End of current
term

16 March 2017 March 2024

Managerial and other board assignments
Competencies (only for members appointed under the provisions of the
Articles of Association)
Lars Rebien Sørensen serves as Chair of the Board of Novo Holdings A/S,
Executive Chair of the Board of Ferring Pharmaceuticals (Switzerland) and
Chair of the Advisory Board of Axcel Management A/S. Furthermore, he is a
member of the Boards of Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. (USA), Essity AB (Sweden) and Jungbunzlauer Suisse AG (Switzerland). Lars Rebien Sørensen
serves as Adjunct Professor at the Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Copenhagen and Adjunct Professor at the Center for Corporate Governance, Copenhagen Business School (CBS).
Board competencies: Managerial experience from a large international company. Extensive knowledge of the Novo Group business standards and practices as well as knowledge of the international pharmaceutical industry. Board
work experience.
Lars Rebien Sørensen is considered a non-independent board member, as he
is Chair of the Board of Novo Holdings A/S.

Lars Henrik Munch
Vice Chair
MSc (Economics)
1959
Male

5 September
2017

March 2024

Lars Henrik Munch serves as Chair of the Board of The Politiken-Foundation
and Politiken Holding A/S and as Chair of the Boards of the Louisiana Museum of Modern Art, Museumsfonden, Louisiana Fonden, BRFfonden, BRFholding A/S, BRFinvest a/s, Fonden for Håndværkskollegier, SOS Børnebyerne and GUBI A/S. Furthermore, Lars Henrik Munch is a member of the
boards of Utzon Center A/S and the KUNSTEN Museum of Modern Art, Aalborg. Lars Henrik Munch is also a member of the Boards of the European
Press Prize (Amsterdam) and the World Association of News Publishers
(Paris), as well as Chair of the Advisory Board for Master of Management Development, Copenhagen Business School (CBS) and Vice Chair of the Board of
Axcelfuture. Lars Henrik Munch serves as Adjunct Professor at the Department of Organisation, CBS.
Board competencies: Experience with society and social conditions, art and
culture, media and board work.
Lars Henrik Munch is considered an independent board member.

Steen Riisgaard
MSc
CEO
1951
Male

19 March 2013 March 2024

Steen Riisgaard serves as Chair of the Board of New Xellia Group A/S, and as
Vice Chair of the Board of Novo Holdings A/S. Steen Riisgaard is a member of
the Board of Corbion and Vice Chair of Fugleværnsfonden.
Board competencies: Experience with management in general from a large international company. Knowledge of the Novo Group business standards and
practices and extensive knowledge of international biotechnology industry
and research within the private sector. Experience with innovation and entrepreneurship.
Steen Riisgaard is considered a non-independent board member, as he is Vice
Chair of Novo Holdings A/S and Chair of New Xellia Group A/S.

Lars Henrik Fugger
19 March 2013 March 2024
Professor, MD, Ph.D., Nuffield Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, Division of
Clinical Neurology, John
Radcliffe Hospital, University
of Oxford, United Kingdom
MD, Ph.D. and a DMSc
1960
Male

Lars Henrik Fugger is Professor at the Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Division of Clinical Neurology, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of
Oxford, UK. He serves as member of the Board of the Alfred Benzon Foundation.
Board competencies: Experience with medical science research, innovation
and research management. Experience with research evaluations/authorisations/counselling as well as politics within medical science.
Lars Henrik Fugger is considered a non-independent board member.

20

Annual Report 2023

Table 8. Members of the Novo Nordisk Foundation Board of Directors, 2023 - continued

Name, position, title, year of Date of accesbirth, gender
sion

End of current
term

Managerial and other board assignments
Competencies (only for members appointed under the provisions of the
Articles of Association)

Liselotte Højgaard
Professor, Consultant
MD, DMSc
1957
Female

March 2024

Liselotte Højgaard is Clinical Professor in the fields of medicine and technology at the Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences at the University of Copenhagen. She is a member of the Boards of BRFfonden, Die Robert Bosch
Stiftung (Germany), and Arvid Nilsson’s Foundation and was member of
Kronprins Frederiks og Kronprinsesse Marys Fond. Furthermore, she is a
member of the Scientific Council at the European Research Council (ERC).

1 April 2018

Board competencies: Experience with medical science research, innovation,
and research management. Experience with research evaluations/authorisations/counselling as well as politics within medical science.
Liselotte Højgaard is considered an independent board member.
Nana Bule Sejbæk

13 March 2023 March 2024

BSc (Business Economics
and Strategy)
1978

Nana Bule Sejbæk serves as Chair of the National Digital Council and Energy
Crisis Staff, and as Chair of the Board of Carbfix. Furthermore, Nana Bule
Sejbæk is a member of the boards of Arla Foods and Energinet, and works as
an Operating Advisor with Goldman Sachs Asset Management.
Nana Bule Sejbæk works as an Operating Advisor with Goldman Sachs Asset
Management.

Female

Board competencies: Senior Executive experience from a large international
Tech company with a proven track record of driving transformation and delivering business growth. Board word experience.
Nana Bule is considered an independent board member.
Christoffer A. Voigt

13 March 2023 March 2024

Professor
BSE (chemical engineering)
PhD (biochemistry and biophysics)

Christopher A. Voigt is the Daniel I.C. Wang Professor of Advanced Biotechnology and Department Head in Biological Engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), as well as the co-director of the Synthetic Biology
Center at MIT.
Christopher A. Voigt is a founding member of the U.S. National Science Foundation-funded Engineering Biology Research Center, former founding Editorin-Chief of the ACS Synthetic Biology journal, and co-founder of the companies Asimov (therapeutics bio-manufacturing) and Pivot Biotechnologies (agriculture).

1976
Male

Board competencies: Extensive scientific advisory experience. Expert
knowledge within synthetic biology and genetic engineering as well as the
translation of cutting-edge science into innovations and start-up companies.
Christopher A. Voigt is considered an independent board member.
Mads Boritz Grøn
Quality Auditor
MSc (Biology)
1967
Male

23 March 2018 March 2026

Employee representative. Quality Auditor in Novo Nordisk A/S.

Ole Jakob Müller
Environmental Consultant
1978
Male

25 March 2022 March 2026

Employee representative. Senior Environmental Specialist in Novozymes A/S.

Stig Strøbæk
Electrician
1964
Male

25 March 2022 March 2026

Employee representative. Electrician in Novo Nordisk A/S.

21

Annual Report 2023

Committees and panels of the Novo Nordisk Foundation
The Foundation supports research, innovation and education in open competition, and has for this purpose appointed 26 committees and panels
with external members who receive honoraria for their work. 23 of the appointed committees carry out the task of implementing the Board’s decisions concerning assessment and awarding of grants. In addition to this, the Foundation awards grants for strategic and stand-alone projects. The
Foundation has appointed various advisory panels which the Board consults before making its grant-awarding decisions in connection with specific applications and projects. Furthermore, the Foundation’s Board of Directors makes use of international peer review.
See the Foundation’s website for further details and an overview of our committees https://novonordiskfonden.dk/en/committees/ and Articles
of Association https://novonordiskfonden.dk/en/who-we-are/articles-of-association/. The members of the committees and panels are internationally recognised experts in their field, often supplemented by experience gained as members of research councils and other academic research
committees. The Foundation has adopted a set of rules for eligibility to ensure a fair, equal and unbiased assessment of all applications. The rules
can be accessed on the Foundation’s website: https://novonordiskfonden.dk/en/who-we-are/rules-for-eligibility/.
Table 9. Fees for committee and panel members in 2023
Committee on Clinical and Translational Medicine

Committee on Bioscience and Basic Biomedicine

Committee on Endocrinology and Metabolism

Committee on Non-Diabetic Endocrinology

Innovation Committee

Committee on the Novo Nordisk Prize*

Committee on the Novozymes Prize

Committee on Research in Art and Art History

Committee on Industrial Biotechnology and Environmental Biotechnology

Committee on Plant Science, Agriculture and Food Biotechnology

Committee for the Natural and Technical Sciences

Humanitarian and Development Advisory Panel*

Committee on Science Education and Outreach

Committee on the Novo Nordisk Foundation Teaching Prizes

Committee on Steno Research Collaboration

DKK thousands
Chair

190

Members

125

Chair

180

Members

120

Chair

165

Members

110

Chair

90

Members

60

Chair

90

Members

60

Chair

150

Members

100

Chair

125

Members

85

Chair

95

Members

65

Chair

125

Members

85

Chair

125

Members

85

Chair

135

Members

90

Chair

0

Members

15

Chair

110

Members

75

Chair

40

Members

25

Chair

90

Members

60

22

Annual Report 2023

Table 9. Fees for committee and panel members in 2023 (continued)
Committee on Nursing Research

Committee on Interdisciplinary Research

Committee on International Research Leader Grants

Committee on Science Communication and Debate

Committee on Inequity in Health

Committee on STEM Vocational Education and Training

Committee on Coherence in Health Care

Committee on Data Science 2023

Committee on Novo Nordisk Fondens Challenge Programme 2023 – RNA- and Oligonucleotide-based Therapeutics

Committee on Novo Nordisk Fondens Challenge Programme 2023 – Prediction of Climate Change and Effect of
Mitigating Solutions

Committee on Novo Nordisk Fondens Challenge Programme 2023 – Future Agri-food systems

DKK thousands
Chair

90

Members

60

Chair

125

Members

85

Chair

80

Members

55

Chair

45

Members

30

Chair

43

Members

29

Chair

45

Members

30

Chair

60

Members

40

Chair

155

Members

105

Chair

60

Members

45

Chair

65

Members

45

Chair

60

Members

45

* CEO Mads Krogsgaard Thomsen serves as member of the Committee on the Novo Nordisk Prize, for which he receives no fee. Board members Liselotte Højgaard and Lars
Henrik Fugger also serve as members of the Committee on the Novo Nordisk Prize.

In addition to the above, the Foundation has four internal committees (Committee for Research Infrastructure, NNF Symposium Committee, Committee for RECRUIT and Committee for Start Package Grants, which are comprised of employees from the Novo Nordisk Foundation). None of
these internal members receive fees for their work.
Executive Management
In 2023 the CEO Office, which undertakes the daily management of the Novo Nordisk Foundation, was comprised of the Foundation’s CEO Mads
Krogsgaard Thomsen. The CEO Office is responsible for all operational matters and for the implementation of the strategy and policies that have
been decided by the Board of Directors. The Board approves the appointment of the CEO based on the recommendations of the Chairmanship,
which also assesses the CEO’s performance every year. In 2023, the Foundation paid DKK 9,651,000 in ordinary salary, short term incentives and
pension to CEO Mads Krogsgaard Thomsen.

23

Annual Report 2023

Table 10. Key figures and financial ratios in the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group
DKK million
2023

2022

2021

2020

2019

Net sales

269,066

208,240

163,063

146,331

142,175

Operating profit

113,784

60,995

87,002

71,450

67,229

661

-3,141

1,824

3,702

-3,835

Profit before income taxes

114,445

57,854

88,826

75,152

63,394

Net profit including non-controlling interest

93,345

44,644

76,785

63,483

52,941

Parent foundation's share of the total comprehensive income

31,763

3,353

39,826

30,951

22,971

Equity including non-controlling interest

283,233

243,985

226,861

187,118

155,663

Parent foundation's share of equity

185,102

162,743

166,246

132,928

105,135

Total assets

572,744

481,679

396,473

300,362

254,015

Investment in tangible assets

34,501

18,380

8,786

7,739

10,687

Cash flow from operating activities

113,653

83,891

59,181

55,601

50,902

Cash flow from investing activities

-56,520

-37,523

-44,102

-31,006

-20,742

Net cash flow used financing activities

-53,768

-43,264

-17,078

-26,746

-30,899

Gross margin

42.3%

29.3%

53.4%

48.8%

47.3%

Profit ratio (net profit for the year including non-controlling interests)

34.7%

21.4%

47.1%

43.4%

37.2%

Equity (including non-controlling interest)

49.5%

50.7%

57.2%

62.3%

61.3%

Average number of employees

81,652

74,196

66,387

61,055

60,306

Net financials

Cash flow

Financial ratios

24

Annual Report 2023

Management’s statement
The Board of Directors and Executive Management have today considered and adopted the Annual Report of Novo Nordisk Fonden for the financial year 1 January - 31 December 2023.
The Annual Report is prepared in accordance with IFRS Accounting Standards as adopted by the EU and further requirements in the Danish Financial Statements Act.
In our opinion, the Consolidated Financial Statements and Financial Statements give a true and fair account of the Group’s and the Parent Foundation’s assets and liabilities as well as financial position as per 31 December 2023, as well as of the Group’s and the Parent Foundation’s operations
and cash flows for the financial year 2023.
In our opinion, the Management’s review includes a true and fair account of the development in the Group’s and the Parent Foundation’s operations and financial circumstances, as well as a description of the most significant risks and elements of uncertainty facing the Group and the Parent
Foundation.
Hellerup, 16 May 2024

Executive Management:
Mads Krogsgaard Thomsen
(CEO)

Søren Nedergaard
(COO)

Erika Söderberg Johnsson
(CFO)

Lars Rebien Sørensen
(Chair)

Lars Henrik Munch
(Vice Chair)

Steen Riisgaard

Nana Bule Sejbæk

Lars Henrik Fugger

Liselotte Højgaard

Christopher A. Voigt

Ole Jakob Müller

Mads Boritz Grøn

Board of Directors:

Stig Strøbæk

Annual Report 2023

25

Independent auditor’s
Report
To the Board of Directors of Novo Nordisk Fonden
Opinion
In our opinion, the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Parent Foundation’s Financial Statements give a true and fair view of the Group’s
and the Parent Foundation’s financial position at 31 December 2023 and of the results of the Group’s and the Parent Foundation’s operations and
cash flows for the financial year 1 January to 31 December 2023 in accordance with IFRS Accounting Standards as adopted by the EU and further
requirements in the Danish Financial Statements Act.
We have audited the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Parent Foundation’s Financial Statements of Novo Nordisk Fonden for the financial year 1 January - 31 December 2023, pp 28-95, which comprise income statement and statement of comprehensive income, balance sheet,
statement of changes in equity, cash flow statement and notes, including material accounting policy information, for both the Group and the Parent
Foundation ( “financial statements”).
Basis for Opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISAs) and the additional requirements applicable in Denmark.
Our responsibilities under those standards and requirements are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial
Statements section of our report. We are independent of the Group in accordance with the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants’
International Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (IESBA Code) and the additional ethical requirements applicable in Denmark, and we
have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements and the IESBA Code. We believe that the audit evidence we
have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Statement on Management’s Review
Management is responsible for Management’s Review, pp 2-26 and pp 96-107.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover Management’s Review, and we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements, our responsibility is to read Management’s Review and, in doing so, consider whether
Management’s Review is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained during the audit, or otherwise appears to
be materially misstated.
Moreover, it is our responsibility to consider whether Management’s Review provides the information required under the Danish Financial Statements Act.
Based on the work we have performed, in our view, Management’s Review is in accordance with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the
Parent Foundation's Financial Statements and has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Danish Financial Statement Act. We
did not identify any material misstatement in Management’s Review.
Management’s Responsibilities for the Financial Statement
Management is responsible for the preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements and Parent Foundation’s Financial Statements that give a
true and fair view in accordance with IFRS Accounting Standards as adopted by the EU and further requirements in the Danish Financial Statements Act, and for such internal control as Management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free
from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

26

Annual Report 2023

In preparing the financial statements, Management is responsible for assessing the Group’s and the Parent Foundation’s ability to continue as a
going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements unless Management either intends to liquidate the Group or the Parent Foundation’s or to cease operations, or has no realistic
alternative but to do so.

Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether
due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs and the additional requirements applicable in Denmark will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could
reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
As part of an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs and the additional requirements applicable in Denmark, we exercise professional judgment
and maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit. We also:
•

Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit
procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk
of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.

•

Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Group’s and the Parent Foundation’s internal control.

•

Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by
Management.

•

Conclude on the appropriateness of Management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and,
based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on
the Group’s and the Parent Foundation’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw attention in our auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to
modify our opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditor’s report. However, future events
or conditions may cause the Group and the Parent Foundation’s to cease to continue as a going concern.

•

Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and contents of the financial statements, including the disclosures, and whether the financial
statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that gives a true and fair view.

•

Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the financial information of the entities or business activities within the Group to express an opinion on the Consolidated Financial Statements. We are responsible for the direction, supervision and performance of the group
audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit opinion.

We communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant
audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify during our audit.

Hellerup, 16 May 2024
PricewaterhouseCoopers
Statsautoriseret Revisionspartnerselskab
CVR-nr. 33 77 12 31

Mogens Nørgaard Mogensen
State Authorised Public Accountant
mne21404

Tue Stensgård Sørensen
State Authorised Public Accountant
mne32200

Annual Report 2023

Financial statements of
the Parent Foundation

27

28

Annual Report 2023

Income statement and statement of comprehensive income for the year
1 January – 31 December
DKK million

Note

Dividend from Novo Holdings A/S

2023

2022

0

38,000

Administration costs
Employee costs

2

-245

-184

Other costs

3

-149

-188

-394

37,628

4,893

-2,965

4,499

34,663

1

1

4,500

34,664

7,594

7,144

0

4,401

-3,094

23,119

4,500

34,664

Result of primary activities
Net financial items

4

Profit before tax
Tax on profit for the year
Profit for the year

Proposed distribution of profit
Grants, net
Reserve for future grants
Retained earnings

5

29

Annual Report 2023

Balance sheet at 31 December
DKK million

Note

2023

2022

Intangible assets

30

20

Tangible assets

39

4

Assets

Investments in subsidiaries

6

2,425

2,143

Other securities and investments

7

13

14

21,684

22,644

2

2

Total non-current assets

24,193

24,827

Joint investment portfolio with Novo Holdings A/S

31,490

26,657

Amounts owed by Novo Holdings A/S

1,900

7,400

Other receivables

35

8

Cash at bank

41

22

Total current assets

33,466

34,087

Total assets

57,659

58,914

Amounts owed by Novo Holdings A/S
Deposits

Equity and liabilities
Capital base

22

22

Retained earnings

20,025

23,119

Reserve for future grants

15,000

15,000

Total equity

35,047

38,141

15,820

15,205

15,820

15,205

6,702

5,497

Amounts owed to group companies

20

19

Trade payables

18

7

Other liabilities

52

45

Grants payable

5

Total non-current liabilities
Grants payable

5

Total current liabilities

6,792

5,568

Toal liabilities

22,612

20,773

Total equity and liabilities

57,659

58,914

Contingent liabilities

7

Related party transactions

8

Other disclosures

9

30

Annual Report 2023

Statement of changes in equity at 31 December
Capital base

Retained
earnings

Reserve for
future grants

Total

Equity as of 1 January

22

0

10,599

10,621

Comprehensive income for the year

0

23,119

11,545

34,664

0

0

-7,144

-7,144

22

23,119

15,000

38,141

Equity as of 1 January

22

23,119

15,000

38,141

Comprehensive income for the year

0

-3,094

7,594

4,500

0

0

-7,594

-7,594

22

20,025

15,000

35,047

DKK million

Note

2022

Grants, net

5

Equity as of 31 December
2023

Grants, net
Equity as of 31 December

5

31

Annual Report 2023

Cash flow statement for the year ended 31 December
DKK million

2023

2022

Profit for the year

4,500

34,664

-3,950

3,014

-2

-6

Other adjustments

-938

1

Cash flow before changes to working capital

-390

37,673

Increase/decrease in other receivables

-27

1

1

6

Reversal of items with no effect on cash flow:
Income from the joint investment portfolio with Novo Holdings A/S
Value adjustments of other securities and investments

Increase/decrease in payables to group companies
Increase/decrease in other payables

18

7

Cash flow from operating activities

-398

37,687

Increase/decrease in amounts owed by Novo Holdings A/S

7,400

-30,044

Contribution to the joint investment portfolio with Novo Holdings A/S

-7,400

-8,000

Repayments from the joint investment portfolio with Novo Holdings A/S

6,517

5,619

Investments in subsidiaries

-282

-1

3

1

Purchase of intangible assets

-53

-11

Sale of intangible assets

42

0

Purchase of tangible assets

-36

-4

Cash flow from investing activities

6,191

-32,440

Grant payments

-5,834

-5,244

60

10

-5,774

-5,234

Net cash flow

19

13

Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year

22

9

Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year

41

22

Investments in other securities and investments, net

Refunds from grant recipients
Cash flow from grants

32

Annual Report 2023

Notes
Note 1 Accounting policies
The accounting policies are the same as for the consolidated financial statements with the adjustments described below. For a description of the
accounting policies of the Group, please refer to the consolidated financial statements.
Investments in subsidiaries
Investments in subsidiaries are recognised at cost price and the dividends received from the subsidiaries are included in the profit and loss.
Gain and losses on sale of shares in subsidiaries are included in the profit and loss.
Grants
Grants are recognised as deductions once the Foundation is obligated towards the grant recipient. From that point in time and until the grant has
been paid out, the grant is included in grants payable.

Note 2 Employee costs
DKK million

2023

2022

Salaries

211

158

Pensions - defined contribution plans

29

24

Social security

3

2

Fees to committees

15

15

Other employee costs

2

7

260

206

Hereof salaries included as internal grants etc.

-15

-22

Total salaries and fees

245

184

Salary and short-term incentives

8

6

Pension

2

2

Executive Management in total

10

8

Fee to Board of Directors

6

5

Total

16

13

Salary, short-term incentives, pension to CEO, Mads Krogsgaard Thomsen

10

8

200

160

Allocated as follows:

Remuneration of Executive Management and Board of Directors

The Executive Management and the Board of Directors of the Novo Nordisk Foundation are not covered by any sharebased payment incentive schemes. The Executive Management constitutes the Key Management Personnel.
Average number of full-time employees

33

Annual Report 2023

Note 3 Fees to statutory auditors
DKK million

2023

2022

Statutory audit

1.1

0.9

Audit related services

0.1

0.1

Tax assurance services

0.0

0.0

Other services

0.6

0.1

Fees to statutory auditors

1.8

1.1

DKK million

2023

2022

Proceeds from the joint investment portfolio with Novo Holdings A/S

3,950

-3,014

940

44

3

5

4,893

-2,965

Note 4 Net financial items

Interest on amounts owed by Novo Holdings A/S
Other financial income
Net financial items

Note 5 Grants
DKK million

2023

2022

903

1,922

Grants awarded in the year:
Natural and Technical Science Research and Interdisciplinarity
Medical Sciences

2,552

1,600

Obesity and Nutritional Sciences

10

1,346

Biotechnology

674

841

Social, Humanitarian and Development Aid

396

618

Innovation

920

553

Education and Outreach

572

541

Infectious Diseases

1,664

43

Total grants awarded in the year

7,691

7,464

Adjustment of grants awarded

-97

-319

0

-1

Grants awarded in the year after adjustments

7,594

7,144

Grant liability at the begining of year

20,702

18,792

Grants paid out during the year

-5,834

-5,244

Refunds from grant recipients

60

10

Grant liability at the end of year

22,522

20,702

Within 1 year

6,702

5,497

1-5 years

13,178

12,146

More than 5 years

2,642

3,059

22,522

20,702

FX adjustments of grants awarded

Expected pay out of the Grant liability

34

Annual Report 2023

Note 6 Investments in subsidiaries
DKK million

2023

2022

Cost at the beginning of year

2,143

2,142

Additions during the year

282

1

2,425

2,143

Carrying amount at the end of the year

Novo Holdings A/S is a 100% owned subsidiary of Novo Nordisk Foundation. The shares in Novo Holdings A/S consist of DKK 115.400.000 Ashares and DKK 384.600.000 B-shares.
Additions during the year of DKK 282 million relates to Quantum Foundry P/S, Novo Nordisk Foundation Cellerator P/S and NVAC P/S (2022:
DKK 1 million relates to NNF India A/S, Quantum Foundry P/S and NNF General Partner ApS).

Note 7 Contingent liabilities

In 2017, the Novo Nordisk Foundation committed to an investment of DKK 25 million in Den Sociale Kapitalfond Invest 1 K/S, for the purpose of
supporting social efforts, which is a main area of support under the Foundation's Articles of Association. In 2023, DKK 5 million has been paid
out to Den Sociale Kapitalfond Invest 1 K/S, DKK 2 million has been received as distributions and DKK 2 million has been made as revaluation.
Thus, DKK 13 million remains of the original commitment.

Note 8 Related party transactions
DKK million

2023

2022

Novo Holdings A/S, the Novo Nordisk Group, the Novozymes Group, the NNIT Group, the Xellia Group, the Sonion Group, the BBI Group, the
Altasciences Group, the Ritedose Group, the Medical Knowledge Group, the KabaFusion Group, the Ellab Group, the Dades Group, other subsidiaries, associated companies and the Boards and Executive Managements of these companies, including the Novo Nordisk Foundation, are
considered to be related parties. Fees to the Executive Management are stated in note 3 in the consolidated financial statements. All agreements
have been negotiated on market-based terms, and the majority of the agreements are valid for one year.
In 2023 and 2022, the Novo Nordisk Foundation had the following transactions with related parties:
Novo Holdings A/S
Purchase of services

81

123

Sale of services

15

16

Interest income on loan to Novo Holdings A/S

940

44

0

38,000

Long term portion of loan to Novo Holdings A/S

21,684

22,644

Short term portio of loan to Novo Holdings A/S

1,900

7,400

Share of joint investment portfolio

31,490

26,657

Share of result of joint investment portfolio

3,950

-3,014

14

13

Purchase of services delivered by NNF India A/S

4

0

Sale of services to Novo Nordisk Foundation Cellerator P/S

23

0

Purchase of services delivered by Novo Nordisk A/S

7

8

Purchase of services delivered by NNE A/S

1

3

Dividend payment recieved

Rent obligation
NNF India A/S

The Novo Nordisk Group

35

Annual Report 2023

The Novozymes Group
Purchase of services delivered by Novozymes A/S

1

0

No transactions have taken place with the management in the Novo Nordisk Foundation, Novo Holdings A/S, the Novo Nordisk Group, Novozymes Group and other subsidiaries.
Besides the above stated related party transactions, regulated grants and ordinary compensation to management, there have been no transactions with the Board of Directors, Executive Management or other related parties.

Note 9 – Other disclosures
Novo Nordisk Foundation subsidiaries
Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/voting rights

Novo Holdings A/S

Denmark

100

NNF India A/S

Denmark

100

Quantum Foundry P/S

Denmark

100

NNF General Partner ApS

Denmark

100

Novo Nordisk Foundation Cellerator P/S

Denmark

100

NVAC P/S

Denmark

100

Group companies are listed in note 31 to the consolidated financial statements.
Tax
From 1 January 2024 the Novo Nordisk Foundation will be subject to Global Minimum Tax (OECD BEPS Pillar 2 rules) due to the ownership of
the Novo Group. The rules are not expected to have an impact on the tax position of the Novo Nordisk Foundation in 2024.

Annual Report 2023

36

Consolidated financial
statements Novo Nordisk
Foundation Group

37

Annual Report 2023

Income statement and statement of comprehensive income for the year 1 January - 31
December
DKK million

Note

2023

2022

2

269,066

208,240

Income statement
Net sales
Cost of goods sold

3,5

Gross profit

-57,288

-46,082

211,778

162,158

Sales and distribution costs

3,5

-60,477

-49,470

Research and development costs

3,5

-34,682

-26,417

3,4,5

-8,725

-6,836

6

14,025

-15,353

3,5

-8,135

-3,087

113,784

60,995

458

3,345

Administrative costs
Return on investment activities and other operating income
Other operating expenses
Operating profit
Income from associated companies
Financial income

7

3,484

950

Financial expenses

7

-3,281

-7,436

114,445

57,854

-21,100

-13,210

93,345

44,644

Non-controlling interests

61,245

42,510

Controlling interests

32,100

2,134

Net profit

93,345

44,644

93,345

44,644

12

630

Exchange rate adjustments of investments in subsidiaries and associated companies

-1,888

2,361

Cash flow hedges, realisation of previously deferred gains/losses

-1,026

1,740

Cash flow hedges, deferred gains/losses incurred during the period

1,593

1,218

Other items

257

-36

Tax on other comprehensive income, income/expense

-377

-940

Other comprehensive income, net of tax

-1,429

4,973

Total comprehensive income

91,916

49,617

60,153

46,264

Controlling interests

31,763

3,353

Total comprehensive income

91,916

49,617

Profit before income taxes
Income taxes

8

Net profit
Net profit for the year is specified as follows:

Statement of comprehensive income
Net profit
Other comprehensive income:
Items that will not be reclassified subsequently to the income statement:
Remeasurement of retirement benefit obligations
Items that will be reclassified subsequently to the income statement:

Total comprehensive income for the year is specified as follows:
Non-controlling interests

28

38

Annual Report 2023

Balance sheet at 31 December
DKK million

Note

2023

2022

Intangible assets

9

104,361

90,289

Tangible assets

10,11

107,223

84,439

Investment property

12

25,085

27,088

Investments in associated companies

14

10,086

9,777

Financial assets

15

146,309

125,887

Deferred tax assets

8

18,146

16,205

411,210

353,685

Assets

Total non-current assets
Inventories

16

38,190

30,586

Trade receivables

17

71,940

57,092

Contractual assets

474

417

Tax receivables

3,124

1,480

2,449

2,860

Other receivables and prepayments

10,102

7,638

Marketable securities

15,838

10,921

19,085

15,949

Derivative financial instruments

23

Cash at bank
Assets held for sale

332

1,051

Total current assets

161,534

127,994

Total assets

572,744

481,679

29

39

Annual Report 2023

Balance sheet at 31 December
DKK million

Note

2023

2022

22

22

Retained earnings

170,505

147,238

Reserve for future grants

15,000

15,000

-425

483

185,102

162,743

98,131

81,242

283,233

243,985

Equity and liabilities
Capital base

Other reserves
Total equity parent foundation
Non-controlling interests

28

Total equity
Grants payable

31

15,820

15,205

Borrowings

19

60,581

57,411

Deferred income tax liability

8

12,449

13,594

Other provisions

18

7,524

5,471

Other liabilities

20

1,047

3,024

97,421

94,705

10,109

7,538

Trade payables

28,920

18,900

Tax payables

7,384

7,002

Total non-current liabilities
Borrowings

19

Other liabilities

20

36,650

30,075

Derivative financial instruments

23

1,343

3,011

67

146

Contractual obligations
Grants payable

31

6,702

5,497

Other provisions

18

100,915

70,621

Liabilities related to assets held for sale

29

0

199

Total current liabilities

192,090

142,989

Total liabilities

289,511

237,694

Total equity and liabilities

572,744

481,679

Commitments and contingent liabilities

24

Share-based payments schemes

25

Financial risks

26

Related party transactions

27

Subsidiaries with significant non-controlling interests

28

Events after the reporting date

30

Group companies

32

40

Annual Report 2023

Statement of changes in equity at 31 December
DKK million

2023

Reserve Currency
Capital Retained for future
adjustbase earnings
grants
ments

Cash
flow
hedges

Other
adjustments

Total
other
comprehensive
income

Minority
interests

Total

Balance at the beginning of the year

22

147,238

15,000

6

301

176

483

81,242

243,985

Currency adjustments of subsidiaries

0

0

0

-511

0

0

-511

-222

-733

Change in effective ownership

0

-2,907

0

0

0

0

0

-455

-3,362

22

144,331

15,000

-505

301

176

-28

80,565

239,890

Net profit

0

24,506

7,594

0

0

0

0

61,245

93,345

Other comprehensive income

0

60

0

-496

163

-64

-397

-1,092

-1,429

Total comprehensive income

0

24,566

7,594

-496

163

-64

-397

60,153

91,916

Share-based payments

0

659

0

0

0

0

0

1,643

2,302

Tax related to equity postings

0

28

0

0

0

0

0

70

98

Purchase of treasury shares

0

238

0

0

0

0

0

-21,464

-21,226

Sale of treasury shares

0

102

0

0

0

0

0

118

220

Dividends

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

-24,837

-24,837

Grants, net

0

0

-7,594

0

0

0

0

0

-7,594

Business acquisitions and other adjustments

0

581

0

0

0

0

0

1,883

2,464

Balance at the end of the year

22

170,505

15,000

-1,001

464

112

-425

98,131

283,233

Balance at the beginning of the year

22

156,326

10,599

-411

-601

311

-701

60,615

226,861

Currency adjustments of subsidiaries

0

0

0

-30

0

0

-30

20

-10

Change in effective ownership

0

12

0

0

0

0

0

-12

0

22

156,338

10,599

-441

-601

311

-731

60,623

226,851

Net profit

0

-9,411

11,545

0

0

0

0

42,510

44,644

Other comprehensive income

0

5

0

447

902

-135

1,214

3,754

4,973

Total comprehensive income

0

-9,406

11,545

447

902

-135

1,214

46,264

49,617

Share-based payments

0

487

0

0

0

0

0

1,193

1,680

Tax related to equity postings

0

44

0

0

0

0

0

101

145

Purchase of treasury shares

0

-8

0

0

0

0

0

-17,612

-17,620

Sale of treasury shares

0

49

0

0

0

0

0

125

174

Dividends

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

-19,318

-19,318

Grants, net

0

0

-7,144

0

0

0

0

0

-7,144

Business acquisitions and other adjustments

0

-266

0

0

0

0

0

9,866

9,600

Balance at the end of the year

22

147,238

15,000

6

301

176

483

81,242

243,985

2022

41

Annual Report 2023

Cash flow statement
DKK million

Note

Operating profit

2023

2022

113,784

60,995

Adjustment of non-cash items:
Depreciations, amortisation and impairment losses

5

15,578

10,435

Other non-cash items

21

23,511

39,436

Income taxes paid

-26,999

-14,696

Interest received and other financial income

3,340

396

Interest paid and other financial expenses

-2,586

-7,248

Cash flow before changes to working capital

126,628

89,318

Increase/decrease in receivables

-19,297

-12,697

Increase/decrease in inventory

-7,613

-6,040

Increase/decrease trade in payables and other debt

15,168

11,970

Currency adjustments

-1,233

1,340

113,653

83,891

-3,195

-15,354

Sale of subsidiaries and activities

920

0

Sale of associated companies

0

3,949

-10,123

-10,894

Cash flow from operating activities
Purchase of subsidiaries

Purchase of financial assets - Life Science Investments
Sale of financial assets - Life Science Investments

11,004

5,293

Purchase of financial assets - other

-44,676

-65,558

Sale of financial assets - other

35,997

66,239

Purchase of intangible assets

-13,457

-3,087

Purchase of tangible assets including investment property

-29,065

-15,716

427

30

-13,018

-9,566

8,261

6,770

405

371

-56,520

-37,523

Proceeds from borrowing

6,347

16,169

Repayment of borrowings

-4,728

-17,293

Purchase of treasury shares

Sale of tangible assets
Payments for marketable securities
Proceeds from sale of marketable securities
Received dividend
Cash flow from investing activities

-21,226

-17,620

Sale of treasury shares

248

174

Repayment leasing

-247

-142

Paid dividend to non-controlling interests

-24,837

-19,318

Purchase of non-controlling interests

-3,551

0

Paid grant Novo Nordisk Foundation, net

-5,774

-5,234

Net cash flow used in financing activities

-53,768

-43,264

Net cash generated from activities

3,365

3,104

Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year

15,925

13,068

-207

-247

19,083

15,925

Exchange gains/(losses) on cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year

22

42

Annual Report 2023

Notes
Accounting policies

43

Net sales – business areas

46

Employee costs

47

Fees to statutory auditors

48

Amortisation, depreciation and impairment losses

49

Return on investment activities and other operating income

49

Financial income and expenses

49

Income taxes

50

Intangible assets

52

Tangible assets

55

Leases

57

Investment property

57

Business acquisitions

59

Associated companies

61

Financial assets

62

Inventories

67

Trade receivables

68

Other provisions

68

Borrowings

70

Other liabilties

71

Other non-cash items

71

Cash and cash equivalents

71

Derivative financial instruments

72

Commitments and contingent liabilities

73

Share-based payment schemes

75

Financial risks

76

Related party transactions

77

Subsidiaries with significant non-controlling interest

78

Assets held for sale

79

Events after the reporting date

79

Grants payable

80

Group companies

81

43

Annual Report 2023

Accounting policies
Principal accounting policies and key accounting
estimates

The consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report
have been prepared in accordance with IFRS Accounting Standards as
issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and in
accordance with IFRS Accounting Standards as adopted by the EU and
further requirements in the Danish Financial Statements Act.
Measurement basis
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis except for derivative financial instruments, equity investments and trade receivables in a factoring portfolio, which are
measured at fair value.
The principal accounting policies set out below have been applied
consistently in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements
for all the years presented.
Principal accounting policies
Novo Nordisk Foundation’s accounting policies are described in each
of the individual notes to the consolidated financial statements. Accounting policies listed below are regarded as the principal accounting
policies applied by Management:
Net sales (note 2)
Income taxes and deferred income taxes (note 8)
Intangible assets (note 9)
Financial assets (note 15)
Provisions and contingent liabilities (note 18)
Acquisitions of businesses (note 13)
Applying materiality
The consolidated financial statements are a result of processing large
numbers of transactions and aggregating those transactions into classes according to their nature or function. The transactions are presented in classes of similar items in the consolidated financial statements. If a line item is not individually material, it is aggregated with
other items of a similar nature in the consolidated financial statements
or in the notes. Management provides specific disclosures required by
IFRS unless the information is not applicable or is considered immaterial to the decision making of the primary users of these financial statements.

Key accounting estimates and judgements
The use of reasonable estimates and judgements is an essential part of
the preparation of the parent and consolidated financial statements.
Given the uncertainties inherent in Novo Nordisk Foundation Group
business activities, Management must make certain estimates regarding valuation and make judgements on the reported amounts of assets,
liabilities, net sales, expenses and related disclosures.
The key accounting estimates identified are those that have a significant risk of resulting in a material adjustment to the measurement of
assets and liabilities in the following reporting period. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are held to be reasonable under the circumstances. The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
If necessary, changes are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised. Management considers the key accounting estimates
to be reasonable and appropriate based on currently available information. The actual amounts may differ from the amounts estimated as
more detailed information becomes available.
In addition, Management makes judgements in the process of applying
the entity’s accounting policies, for example classification of a transaction as an asset acquisition or a business combination.
The estimates are made by Management in Novo Nordisk, Novozymes
and Novo Holdings and subsequently evaluated by Management in
Novo Nordisk Foundation. The Foundation regards the following as
the key accounting estimates and judgements used in preparation of
the consolidated financial statements:
Estimate of US sales deduction and provisions for sales rebates (note 2
and 18)
Estimate in determining the fair value of intangible assets when acquiring assets in a business combination (note 13)
Judgment and estimate regarding deferred income tax assets and provision for uncertain tax positions (note 8)
Estimate regarding impairment of assets and judgement of whether a
transaction is an asset acquisition or a business combination (note
9 and 13)
Fair value measurement and valuation of unquoted investments (note
15)
Estimate of ongoing legal disputes, litigation and investigations (note
18)
The estimates are described in the notes to the consolidated financial
statements.

44

Annual Report 2023

Changes in accounting policies and disclosures
Adoption of new or amended IFRS
Management has assessed the impact of new or amended and revised
accounting standards and interpretations (IFRS) issued by the IASB
and IFRSs endorsed by the European Union effective on or after 1 January 2023.
It is assed that the application of amendments effective 1 January 2023
has not had a material impact on the consolidated financial statements
for 2023. Furthermore, Management does not anticipate any significant
impact in future years from adoption of these amendments.

General policies
Principles of consolidation
The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the parent foundation Novo Nordisk Foundation and entities
controlled by the Novo Nordisk Foundation. Control exists when the
Novo Nordisk Foundation has effective power over the entity and has
the right to variable returns from the entity.
Where necessary, adjustments are made to bring the financial statements of subsidiaries in line with the Novo Nordisk Foundation
Group's accounting policies. All intra-Group transactions, balances, income and expenses are eliminated in full when consolidated.
The results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are
included in the consolidated income statement from the effective date
of acquisition and up to the effective date of disposal.
Entities in which the Group directly or indirectly controls at least 20%
but not more than 50% of the voting power are accounted for as associates and measured using the equity method.
The consolidated financial statements are prepared by combining
items of a uniform nature and subsequently eliminating intercompany
transactions, internal stockholdings and balances, and unrealised intercompany profits and losses.

Translation of foreign currencies
Functional and presentation currency
Items included in the financial statements of Novo Nordisk Foundation's entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates (functional currency).
The consolidated financial statements are presented in Danish kroner
(DKK), which is also the functional and presentation currency of the
parent company.
Translation of transactions and balances
Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the transaction dates. Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such
transactions and from the translation at year-end exchange rates of
monetary assets and liabilities are recognised in the income statement.
Foreign currency differences arising from the translation of effective
qualifying cash flow hedges are recognised in other comprehensive income.

Translation of Group companies
Financial statements of foreign subsidiaries are translated into DKK at
the exchange rates prevailing at the end of the reporting period for balance sheet items, and at average exchange rates for income statement
items.
All effects of exchange rate adjustments are recognised in other comprehensive income, i.e.:
the translation of foreign subsidiaries’ net assets at the beginning of the
year to the exchange rates at the end of the reporting period;
the translation of foreign subsidiaries’ statements of comprehensive income at average to year-end exchange rates.

Other Accounting policies
Research and development costs
The Group expenses all research costs related to Novo Nordisk. In line
with industry practice, internal and subcontracted development costs
are also expensed as they are incurred, due to significant regulatory
uncertainties and other uncertainties inherent in the development of
new products. This means that they do not qualify for capitalisation as
intangible assets until marketing approval by a regulatory authority is
obtained or considered highly probable. Costs for post-approval activities that are required by authorities as a condition for obtaining regulatory approval are recognised as research and development costs.
Research and development costs primarily comprise employee costs,
and internal and external costs related to execution of studies, including manufacturing costs and facility costs of the research centres. The
costs also comprise amortisation, depreciation and impairment losses
related to software and property, plant and equipment used in the research and development activities. Impairment losses recognised on
intangible assets not yet available for use related to research and development projects are presented in research and development costs.
For acquired research and development projects, patents and licences,
the likelihood of obtaining future commercial sales is reflected in the
cost of the asset, and thus the probability recognition criteria are always considered to be satisfied. As the cost of acquired research and
development projects can often be measured reliably, these projects
fulfil the capitalisation criteria as intangible assets on acquisition. Subsequent milestone payments payable on achievement of a contingent
event (e.g. commencement of phase 3 trials) are accrued and capitalised into the cost of the intangible asset when the achievement of the
event is probable. Development costs incurred subsequent to acquisition are treated consistently with internal project development costs.
Assets that are subject to amortisation are reviewed for impairment
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
If the carrying amount of intangible assets exceeds the recoverable
amount based on the existence of one or more of the above indicators
of impairment, any impairment is measured based on discounted projected cash flows. Impairments are reviewed at each reporting date for
possible reversal
Financial assets and liabilities
Depending on purpose, the Group classifies investments into the following categories:

45

Annual Report 2023

– Financial assets at fair value through the income statement
– Financial assets at amortised cost
– Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income
Management determines the classification of its financial assets on initial recognition and re-evaluates this at the end of every reporting period to the extent that such a classification is permitted or required.
Recognition and measurement
Purchases and sales of financial assets are recognised on the settlement date. These are initially recognised at fair value.
Fair value disclosures are made separately for each class of financial instruments at the end of the reporting period.
Financial assets are removed from the balance sheet when the rights to
receive cash flows have expired or have been transferred, and the
Group has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership.
Financial assets 'at fair value through the income statement'
Financial assets at fair value through the income statement consist of
equity investments and forward exchange contracts. Equity investments are included in other financial assets unless management intends to dispose of the investment within 12 months of the end of the
reporting period. In that case, the current part is included in assets held
for sale.
Net gains and losses arising from changes in the fair value of financial
assets are recognised in the income statement as financial income or
expenses. The fair values of quoted investments are based on current
bid prices at the end of the reporting period. Financial assets for which
no active market exists are carried at fair value based on a valuation
methodology.
Financial assets 'at amortised cost'
Financial assets at amortised cost are cash at bank and non-derivative
financial assets solely with payments of principal and interest. The
Group normally 'holds-to-collect' the financial assets to attain the contractual cash flows. If collection is expected within one year (or in the
normal operating cycle of the business if longer), they are classified as
current assets. If not, they are presented as non-current assets.
Trade receivables are initially recognised at transaction price and other
receivables are recognised initially at fair value. Subsequently, they are
measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method, less allowance for doubtful receivables.
Financial assets 'at fair value through other comprehensive income'
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income are
trade receivables that are held to collect or to sell in factoring agreements.
Financial liabilities 'at fair value through the income statement'
Financial liabilities at fair value through the income statement consist of
forward exchange contracts.

Financial liabilities 'at amortised cost'
Financial liabilities at amortised cost consist of bank overdrafts, trade
payables and other liabilities.
Financial assets (Investments)
The Group divides the financial assets into two main types: Life Science Investments and securities, and two minor types: other financial
assets and contract assets.
Life Science Investments are defined as direct or indirect investments
in financial assets that are primarily related to either healthcare or bioindustrial segments.
Investments that do not meet the definition of the above category are
defined as securities.
Financial assets that fall into the category of either life science or securities are recognised in accordance with IFRS 9 at fair value through
profit or loss. Investments are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently adjusted to fair value. For more information, please refer to
note 14.

Financial definitions
Operating profit
Operating profit as percentage of sales.
Net profit margin (incl. non-controlling interests)
Net profit margin as percentage of sales.
Equity ratio
Total shareholders’ equity (incl. non-controlling interests) as a percentage of total assets at year-end.

Supplementary accounting policies for the parent
foundation
Investments in subsidiaries
In the financial statements of the parent foundation, investments in
subsidiaries are recognised at cost price and dividend received from
the subsidiaries are included in the profit and loss.
Gain and losses on sale of shares in subsidiaries are included in the
profit and loss.
Grants
Grants are recognised as deductions once the parent foundation is obligated towards the grant recipient. From that point in time and until
the grant has been paid out, the grant is included in grants payable.

46

Annual Report 2023

Net sales – business areas
DKK million

2023

2022

Novo Nordisk Group

232,213

176,877

Novozymes Group

17,787

17,553

NNIT Group

2,048

2,300

Sonion Group

1,539

1,597

Xellia Group

2,155

2,315

BBI Group

689

672

Altasciences Group

2,576

3,017

Ritedose Group

1,599

1,278

Medical Knowledge Group (MKG)

2,146

1,706

KabaFusion Group

6,008

925

306

0

269,066

208,240

60,269

53,771

Net sales by subgroups:

Ellab Group
Total net sales
Net sales geographical areas:
Region EMEA
Region China

17,144

16,668

Region North America

157,113

105,861

Rest of the world

34,540

31,940

Total net sales by geographical area

269,066

208,240

Accounting policy
Revenue from sale of goods is recognised when the control of products sold has been transferred to the buyer and it is probable that the Group
will collect the considerations to which it is entitled for transferring the products. Transfer of control of products to the buyer is effectuated at a
single point in time, typically on delivery. The amount of sale to be recognised is based on the consideration the Group expects to receive in exchange for its goods.
When sales are recognised, the Group also records estimates for a variety of sales deductions, including product returns as well as rebates and
discounts to government agencies, wholesalers, health insurance companies, managed healthcare organisations and retail customers. Sales deductions are recognised as a reduction of gross sales to arrive at net sales, by assessing the expected value of the sales deductions (variable consideration). Where contracts contain customer acceptance criteria, the Group recognises sales when the acceptance criteria are satisfied.
In some markets, the Group sells products on a sale-or-return basis. Where there is historical experience or a reasonably accurate estimate of future returns, estimated product returns are recorded as a reduction in sales. Where shipments of new products are made on a sale-or-return basis,
without sufficient historical experience for estimating sales returns, revenue is recorded based on estimated demand and acceptance rates for
well-established products with similar market characteristics. If similar market characteristics do not exist, revenue is recorded when there is evidence of consumption or when the right of return has expired.
Unsettled rebates are recognised as provisions when the timing or amount is uncertain. Where absolute amounts are known, the rebates are recognised as other liabilities.

Key accounting estimates and judgements
Estimate of sales deductions and provisions for sales rebates
Sales deductions are estimated and provided for at the time the related sales are recorded. These estimates of unsettled rebate, discount and
product return obligations require use of significant judgement, as not all conditions are known at the time of the sale, for example total sales

47

Annual Report 2023

volume to a given customer. The estimates are based on analyses of existing contractual obligations and historical experience. Provisions are
calculated on the basis of a percentage of sales for each product as defined by the contracts with the various customer groups. Provisions for sales
rebates are adjusted to actual amounts as rebates, discounts and returns are processed.
The main sales discounts and sales rebates are issued in the US and include US Managed Care, Medicare, Medicaid and other minor US rebate
types.
Revenue related to the 340B Drug Pricing Program can only be recognised to the extent that it is highly probable that a significant reversal of the
recognised revenue will not occur. Significant estimation is required to determine the amount of revenue to recognise. Management has considered interpretations of applicable laws, whether the consideration is highly susceptible to factors outside Novo Nordisk's influence, as well as the
experience of historical claims. Refer to note 18 and 24 for information on the ongoing litigation related to the 340B Drug Pricing Program.
The Group considers the provisions established for sales rebates to be reasonable and appropriate based on currently available information.
However, the actual number of rebates and discounts may differ from the amounts estimated by Management as more detailed information becomes available.

Employee costs
DKK million

Note

2023

2022

53,398

43,905

2,911

2,025

3,882

3,081

Pensions - defined benefit plans

140

198

Other social security contributions

3,478

3,107

Wages and salaries
Share-based payments costs
Pensions - defined contribution plans

24

Other employee costs

4,719

3,714

Total employee costs for the year

68,528

56,030

Employee costs capitalised as intangible assets and property, plant and equipment

-2,397

-1,467

-470

-114

65,661

54,449

Cost of goods sold

21,486

17,424

Sales and distribution costs

22,402

19,289

Research and development costs

13,801

11,325

Administrative costs

7,489

6,098

483

313

65,661

54,449

Salary and short-term incentives

8

6

Pension

2

2

Benefits

0

0

Executive Management in total

10

8

Fee to Board of Directors

6

5

Total

16

13

Salary, short-term incentives, pension to CEO, Mads Krogsgaard Thomsen

10

8

Change in employee costs capitalised as inventories
Total employee costs in the income statement
Included in the income statement:

Other operating income/expenses, net
Total employee costs in the income statement

The Executive Management constitutes the Key Management Personnel.

48

Annual Report 2023

DKK thousands

Novo Nordisk Foundation
Board of Committees
Directors

Lars Rebien Sørensen

1,664

208

Other Group companies

Total

Boards

Committees
and other fees

1,794

75

3,741
208

Marianne Philip

208

Steen Riisgaard

416

Lars Henrik Munch

728

Christopher Ashby Voigt

416

Nana Bule Sejbæk

416

26

Lars Fugger

416

125

Liselotte Højgaard

416

125

Mads Grøn

416

416

Stig Strøbæk*

416

416

Ole Jakob Müller*

416

416

5,928
Number
Average number of full-time employees within the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group

2,135

2,626

75

951

223

566

150

707

442
578

37

541

3,929

337

10,901

2023

2022

81,652

74,196

Accounting Policy
Wages, salaries, social security contributions, paid annual leave and sick leave, bonuses, and non-monetary benefits are recognised in the year in
which the employees render the associated services. Where the Group provides long-term employee benefits, the costs are accrued to match the
rendering of the services.

Fees to statutory auditors
DKK million

2023

2022

Statutory audit

26

26

Audit-related services

8

1

Tax advisory services

22

20

Other services

65

43

Fees to statutory auditors

121

90

Statutory audit

35

43

Audit related services

3

3

Tax advisory services

14

7

Other services

19

38

Fees to other auditors

71

91

49

Annual Report 2023

Amortisation, depreciation and impairment losses
DKK million

2023

2022

Cost of goods sold

6,382

5,720

Research and development costs

3,392

2,670

Sales and distribution costs

1,009

855

Included in the income statement under the following headings:

Administration costs

815

642

Other operating expenses

3,980

548

Total amortisation and impairment losses

15,578

10,435

2023

2022

13,314

-17,692

711

2,339

14,025

-15,353

DKK million

2023

2022

Interest income

1,308

283

458

130

1,371

22

Other financial income

347

515

Total financial income

3,484

950

DKK million

2023

2022

Interest expenses

2,474

1,215

Leases

22

26

Loss on foreign exchange

293

3,192

Financial loss on forward contracts net

60

2,081

Other financial costs

432

922

3,281

7,436

Return on investment activities and other operating income
DKK million
Result of Life Science Investments and securities
Other operating income
Return on investment activities and other operating income

Financial income and expenses
Financial income

Foreign exchange gain
Financial gain on financial instruments

Financial expenses

Total financial expenses

50

Annual Report 2023

Accounting policy
Financial items primarily relate to foreign exchange elements and are mainly impacted by the cumulative value adjustment of cash flow hedged
transferred from other comprehensive income to the income statement when the hedged transaction is recognised in the income statement.
In addition, value adjustments of fair value hedges are recognised in financial income and financial expenses along with any value adjustments of
the hedged asset or liability that are attributable to the hedged risk. Finally, value adjustments of foreign currency assets and liabilities in nonhedged currencies will impact financial income and financial expenses.

Income taxes
DKK million

2023

2022

Current tax on profit for the year

26,611

17,509

Deferred tax on profit for the year

-5,098

-3,787

Tax on profit for the year

21,513

13,722

-413

-512

21,100

13,210

Current and deferred tax on other equity postings for the year

-98

-145

Current and deferred tax on other comprehensive income for the year

377

940

Adjustment tax recognised for prior years
Income taxes in the income statement

Adjustments to previous periods include adjustments that relate to events in the current year in relation to current tax and deferred tax for prior
periods. They mainly include tax payments in connection with transfer price tax cases and reversal of the tax commitment recognised in previous periods related to these tax cases.
From 1 January 2024 the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group will be subject to Global Minimum Tax (OECD BEPS Pillar 2
rules). The rules are not expected to have a material impact on the tax position of the Novo Nordisk Foundation in 2024.
Computation of effective tax rate:
Statutory corporate income tax rate in Denmark

22.0%

22,0%

Deviation in foreign subsidiaries' tax rate compared to the Danish tax rate (net)

-0.8%

-1,3%

Non-taxable income less non-tax-deductible expenses (net)

-2.3%

1,8%

Other adjustments (net)

-0.4%

0,4%

Effective tax rate

18.5%

22.9%

51

Annual Report 2023

Accounting policy
The tax expense for the period comprises current and deferred tax. It also includes adjustments to previous years and changes in provisions for
uncertain tax positions. Tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised in equity or other comprehensive income.
Provisions for ongoing tax disputes are included as part of deferred tax assets, tax receivables and tax payables.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the accounting and tax values of the individual consolidated companies and
from realisable tax loss carry forwards. The tax value of tax loss carry forwards is included in deferred tax assets to the extent that these are expected to be utilised in future taxable income. The deferred income taxes are measured according to current tax rules and at the tax rates assumed in the year in which the assets are expected to be utilised.
Deferred tax is not calculated for investments in subsidiaries, branches or associated companies, as these are permanent deviations. Deferred tax
is only calculated if the deviations are tax deductible. In general, the Danish tax rules related to dividends from group companies provide exemption from tax for most repatriated profits. A provision for withholding tax is only recognised if a concrete distribution of dividends is planned.
The value of future tax deductions in relation to share programs is recognised as deferred tax, until the shares are paid out to the employees. Any
estimated excess tax deduction compared to the costs realised in the income statement is charged to equity.

Key accounting estimates and judgements
The Group is subject to income taxes around the world. Significant judgement and estimates are required in determining the worldwide accrual
for income taxes, deferred income tax assets and liabilities, and provisions for uncertain tax positions. The Group recognises deferred income tax
assets if it is probable that sufficient taxable income will be available in the future, against which the temporary differences and unused tax losses
can be utilised. Management has considered future taxable income and applied its judgement in assessing whether deferred income tax assets
should be recognised. In the course of conducting business globally, tax and transfer pricing disputes with tax authorities may occur. Management
judgement is applied to assess the possible outcome of such disputes. The 'most probable outcome' method is applied when making provisions
for uncertain tax positions, and Novo Nordisk foundation considers the provisions made to be adequate. However, the actual obligation may
deviate and depends on the result of litigation and settlements with the relevant tax authorities
Development in deferred income tax assets and liabilities
DKK million

2023

2022

Net deferred tax asset/(liability) at the beginning of the year

2,611

3,042

Income/(charge) to the income statement

5,098

4,315

Additions during the year from acquisitions of companies

-777

-3,169

Adjustment to prior year

-477

-397

Income/(charge) to other comprehensive income

-425

-880

Income/(charge) to equity

-120

36

Effect of exchange rate adjustments

-213

-336

Net deferred tax asset/(liability) at the end of the year

5,697

2,611

Deferred tax asset at 31 December

18,146

16,205

Deferred tax liability at 31 December

-12,449

-13,594

5,697

2,611

Assets

Liabilities

Total

Tangible assets

0

-5,177

-5,177

Intangible assets

194

-11,286

-11,092

2,060

-237

1,823

2023

Inventories

52

Annual Report 2023

Provisions

14,899

-361

14,538

Share options

277

-633

-356

Tax loss carryforward

75

0

75

4,095

1,791

5,886

21,600

15,903

5,697

-3,454

3,454

0

18,146

12,449

5,697

Tangible assets

0

-7,415

-7,415

Intangible assets

196

-8,407

-8,211

Inventories

2,935

-186

2,749

Provisions

11,064

-20

11,044

Other
Offset within countries
2022

Share options

67

0

67

Tax loss carryforward

636

-395

241

6,423

-2,287

4,136

21,321

-18,710

2,611

-5,116

5,116

0

16,205

-13,594

2,611

Goodwill

Patents,
licenses
and
know Other inhow tangibles

Total

Other
Offset within countries

Intangible assets

DKK million
2023
Costs at the beginning of year

31,340

61,316

14,076

106,732

Effect of exchange rate adjustments

-611

-101

-158

-870

Additions during the year from acquisition of companies

4,114

36

3,198

7,348

Additions during the year

79

12,573

815

13,467

Disposals during the year

0

-1,790

-609

-2,399

Transfer and reclassifications

0

113

-113

0

Transferred to assets classified as held for sale

0

0

0

0

34,922

72,147

17,209

124,278

175

10,976

5,292

16,443

Cost at the end of the year
Amortisation/depreciations and impairment losses at the beginning of the year
Effect of exchange rate adjustments

6

79

-37

48

Amortisation/depreciations for the year

0

2,194

971

3,165

824

1,936

65

2,825

Impairment losses reversed during the year

0

-382

0

-382

Amortisation/depreciation and impairment losses reversed on disposals during the year

0

-1,783

-399

-2,182

Transfer and reclassifications

0

108

-108

0

Amortisation/depreciation and impairment losses at the end of the year

1,005

13,128

5,784

19,917

Carrying amount at the end of the year

33,917

59,019

11,425

104,361

Impairment losses for the year

53

Annual Report 2023

2022
Costs at the beginning of year
Effect of exchange rate adjustments

18,225

48,744

9,085

76,054

242

979

-3

1,218

13,826

10,370

3,585

27,781

Additions during the year

232

1,377

1,619

3,228

Disposals during the year

-1,185

-155

-64

-1,404

Transfer and reclassifications

0

1

-1

0

Transferred to assets classified as held for sale

0

0

-145

-145

31,340

61,316

14,076

106,732

175

8,389

4,514

13,078

Effect of exchange rate adjustments

0

80

19

99

Amortisation/depreciations for the year

0

1,872

845

2,717

Impairment losses for the year

0

788

2

790

Amortisation/depreciation and impairment losses reversed on disposals during the year

0

-153

-29

-182

Transfer and reclassifications

0

0

0

0

Transferred to assets classified as held for sale

0

0

-59

-59

175

10,976

5,292

16,443

31,165

50,340

8,784

90,289

Additions during the year from acquisition of companies

Cost at the end of the year
Amortisation/depreciations and impairment losses at the beginning of the year

Amortisation/depreciation and impairment losses at the end of the year
Carrying amount at the end of the year

When performing the impairment tests, the value of each cash-generating unit's discounted cash flow is compared to the booked value of the unit.
The Group has applied a discount rate of 7 - 12% to calculate the discounted cash flow. Cash flow projections are based on budgets appproved by
Management.
In 2023, an impairment loss of DKK 2,825 million on intangible assets was recognised. The impairment was related to Novo Nordisk and the Xellia
Group.
Goodwill is specified on a CGU level below.
DKK million

2023

2022

Novo Nordisk Group

4,464

4,615

Novozymes Group

1,975

2,007

686

696

Altasciences Group

3,438

3,525

BBI Group

3,026

2,956

KabaFusion Group

3,745

3,818

Medical Knowledge Group

7,238

7,399

Ritedose Group

2,840

2,671

Ellab Group

3,867

0

Sonion Group

2,638

2,643

Xellia Group

0

835

33,917

31,165

NNIT Group

Carrying amount at the end of the year

Annual Report 2023

54

Accounting policy
Goodwill
Goodwill arising from business combinations is recognised and measured as the difference between the total of the fair value of the consideration
transferred compared to the fair value of identifiable net assets on the date of acquisition.
Goodwill is not amortised, but the carrying amount is tested at relevant cash generating unit level (CGU-level) for impairment once a year. Goodwill is written down to its recoverable amount through the income statement if lower than the carrying amount.
Patents, licenses and other intangible assets
Patents and licences, including patents and licences acquired for research and development projects, are carried at historical cost less accumulated amortisation and any impairment loss. Upfront fees and acquisition costs are capitalised and subsequent milestone payments payable on
achievement of a contingent event will be capitalised on the contingent event being probable of being achieved.
Amortisation is based on the straight-line method over the estimated useful life. This means the legal duration or the economic useful life depending on which is shorter, and not exceeding 15 years. The amortisation of patents and licences begins after regulatory approval has been obtained.
Internal development of software for internal use are recognised as intangible assets if the recognition criteria are met, for example a significant
business system where the expenditure leads to the creation of a durable asset. Amortisation is based on the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of 3-15 years. The amortisation begins when the asset is in the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating
in the manner intended by Management.
Acquisition of entities
On acquisition of companies, the identifiable assets acquired, and the liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed are recognised at their fair values at the acquisition date. The consideration transferred includes the fair value at the acquisition date of any contingent consideration arrangement.
Goodwill may subsequently be adjusted for changes in the fair value of the consideration transferred and/or changes in the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired until 12 months after the acquisition date, to the extent such changes relate to facts and circumstances present at the
acquisition date. Acquired companies are consolidated from the date of acquisition.
Research and development projects
Internal and subcontracted research costs are fully charged to the consolidated income statement in the period in which they are incurred. Consistent with industry practice, development costs are also expensed until regulatory approval is obtained or is probable.
Payments to third parties under collaboration and licence agreements are assessed for the substance of their nature. Payments which represent
subcontracted research and development work are expensed as the services are received. Payments which represent rights to the transfer of
intellectual property, developed at risk by the third party, are capitalised.
For acquired research and development projects, patents and licences, the likelihood of obtaining future commercial sales is reflected in the cost
of the asset, and thus the probability recognition criteria are always considered to be satisfied. As the cost of acquired research and development
projects can often be measured reliably, these projects fulfil the capitalisation criteria as intangible assets on acquisition. Subsequent milestone
payments payable on achievement of a contingent event (e.g. commencement of phase 3 trials) are accrued and capitalised into the cost of the
intangible asset when the achievement of the event is probable. Development costs incurred subsequent to acquisition are treated consistently
with internal project development costs.

Key accounting estimates and judgements
Management assesses the risk of impairment of the Group’s intangible assets. This requires judgment in relation to the identification of cash-generating units (CGUs) and the underlying assumptions in the Group’s impairment models. Intangible assets with indefinite useful life and intangible
assets not yet available for use are not subject to amortization. They are tested annually for impairment, irrespective of whether there is any indication that they may be impaired.

55

Annual Report 2023

If there is any indication of impairment, value in use is estimated and compared with the carrying amount. The calculation of value in use is based
on the discounted cash flow method using estimates of future cash flows from the continuing use. The key parameters are the expected revenue
streams and the rate used to discount the cash flows.
Management makes judgements related to intangible assets when assessing whether a transaction is a business combination or an asset acquisition. An asset acquisition will arise when substantially all the transaction value is concentrated in a single asset or when there are no substantive
business processes in the acquired entity. Judgements are also made in evaluating whether payments under collaboration arrangements are acquisition of assets or prepayments of R&D services.

Tangible assets
DKK million

Land and Plant and
buildings machinery

Other
Assets
equipunder
ments construction

Total

2023
Cost at the beginning of the year

54,384

53,776

11,688

26,667

146,515

Effect of exchange rate adjustments

-878

-724

-165

-409

-2,176

61

1

87

0

149

Additions during the year

3,052

468

1,210

29,771

34,501

Disposals during the year

-1,185

-1,105

-820

-621

-3,731

Transfer and reclassifications

5,056

6,138

903

-12,840

-743

Cost at the end of the year

60,490

58,554

12,903

42,568

174,515

Amortisation/depreciation and impairment losses at the beginning of the year

21,556

33,114

7,239

167

62,076

Effect of exchange rate adjustments

-351

-417

-132

9

-891

Amortisation/depreciation for the year

2,920

2,839

1,449

0

7,208

524

1,210

96

932

2,762

-1,040

-1,074

-776

-562

-3,452

-134

-278

2

-1

-411

Amortisation/depreciation and impairment losses at the end of the year

23,475

35,394

7,878

545

67,292

Carrying amount at the end of the year

37,015

23,160

5,025

42,023

107,223

Leased assets included in the end of the year

5,450

82

850

0

6,382

Additions during the year from acquisition of companies

Impairment losses for the year
Amortisation/depreciation and impairment losses reversed on disposals during the
year
Transfer and reclassifications

In 2023, an impairment loss of DKK 2,762 million on tangible assets was recognised. The impairment was related to Novo Nordisk and the Xellia
Group.

56

Annual Report 2023

2022
Cost at the beginning of the year

51,986

50,954

11,758

12,932

Effect of exchange rate adjustments

516

708

48

690

1,962

Additions during the year from acquisition of companies

720

385

79

80

1,264

Additions during the year

907

364

966

16,143

18,380

Disposals during the year

-486

-275

-804

-40

-1,605

Transfer and reclassifications

1,134

1,640

345

-3,119

0

Transferred to assets classified as held for sale

-393

0

-704

-19

-1,116

Cost at the end of the year

54,384

53,776

11,688

26,667

146,515

Amortisation/depreciation and impairment losses at the beginning of the year

19,430

30,411

7,112

78

57,031

Effect of exchange rate adjustments

-49

248

78

3

280

Amortisation/depreciation for the year

2,746

2,681

1,345

0

6,772

16

17

3

119

155

-445

-253

-790

-33

-1,521

0

10

-10

0

0

-142

0

-499

0

-641

Amortisation/depreciation and impairment losses at the end of the year

21,556

33,114

7,239

167

62,076

Carrying amount at the end of the year

32,828

20,662

4,449

26,500

84,439

Leased assets included in the end of the year

3,914

87

681

0

4,682

Impairment losses for the year
Amortisation/depreciation and impairment losses reversed on disposals during the
year
Transfer and reclassifications
Transferred to assets classified as held for sale

127,630

Accounting policy
Property, plant and equipment is measured at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and any impairment loss. The cost of self-constructed
assets includes costs directly and indirectly attributable to the construction of the assets.
Any subsequent cost is included in the asset’s carrying amount or recognised as a separate asset only when it is probable that future economic
benefits associated with the item will flow to the Group and the cost of the item can be measured reliably.
Depreciation is based on the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets:
Buildings, 12-50 years
Plant and machinery: 5-25 years
Other equipment: 3-18 years
Land is not depreciated.
The depreciation commences when the asset is available for use, i.e. when it is in the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by Management.
The assets’ residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted, if appropriate, at the end of each reporting period. If an asset’s carrying
amount is higher than its estimated recoverable amount, it is written down to the recoverable amount.
Plant and equipment with no alternative use developed as part of a research and development project are expensed. However, plant and equipment with an alternative use or used for general research and development purposes are capitalised and depreciated over the estimated useful
life as research and development costs.

57

Annual Report 2023

Leases
DKK milliion

2023

2022

Total amounts recognised in the income statement

2,127

1,663

Total paid amount related to leases

2,197

1,613

Amounts recognised in the income statement

Undiscounted lease commitments

Within 1
year

1-3 year

3-5 year

More
than 5
year

Total

1,613

2,277

1,363

1,758

7,011

Accounting policy
The Group mainly leases office buildings, warehouses, laboratories and vehicles. The right-of-use asset is presented in property, plant and equipment and the lease liability in borrowings.
For contracts which are or contain a lease, the Group recognises a right-of use asset and a lease liability. The right-of-use asset is initially measured
at cost, being the initial amount of the lease liability. The right-of-use asset is subsequently depreciated using the straight-line method over the
lease term. The right-of-use asset is periodically adjusted for certain remeasurements of the lease liability and reduced by any impairment losses.
The lease term determined by the Group is the non-cancellable period of a lease, together with extension/termination option if these are reasonably certain to be exercised.
When determining the term, Management considers multiple factors that create economic incentives to exercise an option to extend the lease or
not to terminate the lease, including termination penalties, potential relocation costs and whether significant leasehold improvements have been
capitalised on the lease, with a remaining useful life which exceeds the fixed minimum duration of the lease.
For contracts with a rolling term (evergreen leases), the Group estimates the leasing period to be equal to the termination period if no probable
scenario exists for estimating the leasing period.
The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments outstanding at the commencement date, discounted using the
incremental borrowing rate. The lease liability is measured using the effective interest method. Variable lease payments not based on an index or a
rate are recognised as an expense in the income statement as incurred. Residual value guarantees that are expected to be paid are included in the
initial measurement of the lease liability.
The lease liability is remeasured when there is a change in future lease payments, typically due to a change in index or rate (e.g. inflation) on property leases, or if there is a reassessment of whether an extension or termination option will be exercised. A corresponding adjustment is made to
the right-of use asset, or in the income statement when the right-of-use asset has been fully depreciated.
New lease contracts with a lease term of 12 months or less and lease of low value assets are not recognised on the balance sheet. These are expensed on a straight-line basis over the lease term or another systematic basis. Lease of low value assets include personal computers, telephones
and small items of office equipment.

Investment property
Accounting policy
Investment properties are measured upon initial recognition at cost price, which includes the purchase price of the property and any directly associated costs. Investment properties are subsequently measured at estimated fair value. The measurement is made by using a 10-annual discounted cash flow model (DCF model), where the future cash flows from ownership of the investment properties are discounted back to present
value. The return requirement (discounting factors) is determined property by property.
Costs that add to an investment property, in the form of new or improved features compared to the time of acquisition and thereby improve or
ensure the property's future return, are added as an improvement. Costs that do not add new or improved features to an investment property are

58

Annual Report 2023

expensed in the income statement. Housing projects are also measured at fair value from the expected value at the time of commissioning
weighted by assessed degree of completion. Investment properties have like other tangible assets, except for reasons, a limited life. The impairment that takes place as an investment property becomes obsolete, is reflected in the investment property's ongoing valuation at fair value. Systematic depreciation is therefore not carried out over the useful life of the investment properties.
Value adjustments are entered via the income statement.

DKK million
Cost at the beginning of the year

2023

2022

27,508

0

0

27,738

Additions during the year from acquisition of companies
Additions during the year

467

399

Disposals during the year

-158

-629

Cost at the end of the year

27,817

27,508

-420

0

-2,059

-420

-253

0

Value adjustments at the end of the year

-2,732

-420

Fair value at the end of the year

25,085

27,088

The properties' average weighted return requirement

2023

2022

Investment properties, Dades Group

5.28

4.82

Value adjustments at the beginning of the year
Value adjustments during the year
Value adjustments on disposals during the year

Investment property relates to the Dades Group.

Changes in yield requirements are a significant element that affects property value. The sensitivity and
the connection between net worth in the group and various requirements for the property's return:
Change in required return and property value
Change in Average return in
%

Carrying amount

-0.50

4.78

27,848

-0.25

5.03

26,407

Basis

5.28

25,085

0.25

5.53

23,944

0.50

5.78

22,882

Change

The distribution of applied rates of return on the entire portfolio as well as the average price per m2.

Share of portfolio

Average rate of return

Average price per
m2 in DKK

Rate of return: 7.50% - 9.00%

1%

7.50%

6,738

Rate of return: 7.00% - 7.49%

5%

7.19%

10,982

Interval

59

Annual Report 2023

Rate of return: 6.50% - 6.99%

13%

6.71%

18,422

Rate of return: 6.00% - 6.49%

15%

6.29%

17,755

Rate of return: 5.50% - 5.99%

7%

5.79%

18,237

Rate of return: 5.00% - 5.49%

10%

5.19%

26,258

Rate of return: 4.50% - 4.99%

26%

4.63%

28,906

Rate of return: 4.00% - 4.49%

15%

4.25%

37,228

Rate of return: 3.50% - 3.99%

8%

3.84%

39,432

Rent per m2 per year
in DKK

Rental percentage %

Average rate of
return in %

31 December 2023

1,381

94

5.28

31 December 2022

1,357

95

4.82

Most significant unobservable assumptions used when calculating
the fair value

Business acquisitions
Novo
Holdings

Others

Ellab

Others

3,177

57

3,234

Tangible assets

149

0

149

Financial assets

3

0

3

Inventories

96

0

96

Trade and other receivables

208

0

208

Cash at bank and cash equivalents

115

0

115

Current and deferred tax liabilities, net

-722

0

-722

-1,780

-304

-2,084

0

0

0

Acquired net assets

1,246

-247

999

Non-controlling interest

-1,803

0

-1,803

Group's share

-557

-247

-804

Goodwill

3,867

247

4,114

3,310

0

3,310

3,310

0

3,310

Settlement of pre-existing relationships

0

0

0

Fair value of existing shareholdings

0

0

0

Contingent considerations

0

0

0

Deferred considerations

0

0

0

3,310

0

3,310

DKK million

Total

2023
Intangible assets excluding goodwill

Financial and other liabilities
Other net assets

Purchase price:
Cash

Total purchase price

60

Annual Report 2023

Cash flow for acquisitions:
Cash payment

3,310

0

3,310

Less cash and cash equivalents in acquired business

-115

0

-115

Cash outlfow for acquisitions

3,195

0

3,195

Accounting policy
When accounting for business combinations, the acquisition method is applied in accordance with IFRS 3.
Upon acquisition of new entities, the acquired assets, liabilities, and contingent liabilities are measured at fair value at the date when control was
achieved.
The consideration transferred as payment for the acquiree consist of the fair value of assets transferred, liabilities incurred to former owners of the
acquiree, and equity instruments issued. Contingent considerations dependent on future events or the performance of contractual obligations are
also recognised at fair value and form part of the total consideration transferred. Fair value changes in contingent considerations are recognised in
the income statement until final settlement.
Identifiable intangible assets are recognised if they arise from a contractual right or can otherwise be separately identified.
Deferred tax is recognised for identifiable tax benefits existing at the date of acquisition and from the perspective of the new combined Group in
compliance with local tax legislation.
The differences between the fair value of the acquisition cost and the fair value of the acquired identifiable net assets is recognised as goodwill.
Transaction costs are recognised as operating costs as they are incurred. If measurement of the identifiable net assets is uncertain at the date of
acquisition, initial recognition is done based on provisional amounts. Measurement period adjustments to the provisional amounts may be done
up to 12 months following the date of acquisition.

Business acquisitions in 2023
Business acquisitions in 2023 in Novo Nordisk
No transactions completed during 2023 were classified as acquisitions of businesses.

Business acquisitions in 2023 in Novozymes
No acquisitions were made in 2023. On 29 January 2024 the final regulatory approvals were obtained and the final registration of the statutory
merger between Novozymes and Chr. Hansen successfully completed with the Danish Business Authority. The merger will be accounted for as a
business combination using the acquisition method under IFRS 3 where Novozymes was identified as the acquirer and Chr. Hansen was identified
as the acquiree. An initial purchase price allocation is still under preparation.

Business acquisitions in 2023 in Novo Holdings
Ellab
In September 2023, the Group acquired Ellab, a global leader in validation and monitoring solutions primarily for the pharmaceutical industry. In
October 2023 the Group sold a non-controlling interest of 34% in Ellab to the Lundbeck Foundation.
About Ellab
Headquartered in Hillerød, Denmark, Ellab provides mission-critical validation- and monitoring solutions used for measuring and documenting
critical parameters such temperature, pressure and CO2 in mainly biotech and pharma processes. The Company serves all of the top 20 biotech
companies and all of the top 40 pharma companies globally helping them ensure consumer safety and regulatory compliance, while reducing time
to market and the risk of product loss.

61

Annual Report 2023

Strategic rationale and synergies
Ellab is an innovative company with a high-quality offering that positions the company to benefit from a growing underlying sector exposed to
increasing quality requirements. Ellab is expected to benefit from the Group’s extensive expertise in pharmaceutical manufacturing and industry
relationships.
Transaction costs of DKK 68 million have been recognised as expenses in 2023.
The accounting for the Ellab acquisition is considered provisional at 31 December 2023.
Earnings impact
From the acquisition date to 31 December 2023, Ellab contributed net sales of DKK 306 million and a net loss of DKK 145 million. If the acquisition
had occurred on 1 January 2023, the full year impact on the Group’s net sales and net loss would have been DKK 963 million and DKK 145 million
respectively.

Business acquisitions in 2022
For a description of business acquisitions in 2022, please refer to note 13 in the 2022 Annual Report.

Business acquisitions in 2022 in Novo Nordisk
On 14 October 2022, Novo Nordisk acquired all outstanding shares of the publicly held US company Forma Therapeutics Holdings, Inc. at a price
of USD 20 per share via a cash tender offer, equal to a total purchase price of DKK 8,102 million. At end of 2022, the initial accounting for goodwill,
intellectual property rights, other intangible assets and deferred tax assets and liabilities remained provisional. The valuation of these were finalised in 2023 with the result that net deferred tax liabilities were reduced retrospectively by DKK 524 million to a total of DKK 709 million. The
reduction was offset by a corresponding amount to goodwill. The valuation of intellectual property rights and other intangible assets remain unchanged.

Business acquisitions in 2022 in Novozymes
No acquisitions were made in 2022.

Business acquisitions in 2022 in Novo Holdings
Adjustment to prior-year business acquisitions
The fair value and allocation of acquired assets, liabilities and non-controlling interests in Medical Knowledge Group, Ritedose, KabaFusion and
Dades were finalised in 2023, which did not lead to any adjustments.

Associated companies
DKK million

2023

2022

11,559

12,865

Effect of exchange rate adjustments

2

2

Additions during the year from acquisition of companies

0

271

Additions during the year

86

0

Disposals during the year

-4

-1,579

Transferred to investments

0

0

Cost at the end of the year

11,643

11,559

Value adjustment at the beginning of the year

-1,782

-2,075

Effect of exchange rate adjustment

-66

-89

Share of result for the year

458

582

Received dividend

-405

-371

0

362

238

-191

Value adjustments end of year

-1,557

-1,782

Carrying amount at the end of the year

10,086

9,777

Cost at the beginning of the year

Disposals during the year
Other adjustments

62

Annual Report 2023

Fair value of shares in listed stocks in associated companies
Chr. Hansen Holding A/S

16,410

14,483

ConvaTec Group PLC

8,814

8,197

Accounting policy
Investments in associated companies are recorded under the equity method, using the respective share of the net values in the associated companies using the Group accounting principles. Goodwill related to associated companies is included in the value of investments in associated companies.

Financial assets
DKK million

2023

2022
Other
financial

Life science
investments Securities

Other
financial
assets

Life science
investments

Securities

assets

Total

42,187

63,149

2,784

108,120

36,818

64,160

Transferred from associated companies

0

0

-1

-1

0

0

0

0

Additions from acquisition of companies

0

0

3

3

0

-3,100

15

-3,085

Additions during the year,
net

-1,217

9,460

-530

7,713

5,369

2,089

1,481

8,939

Cost at the end of the year

40,970

72,609

2,256

115,835

42,187

63,149

2,784 108,120

Value adjustments at the
beginning of the year

3,988

14,414

-635

17,767

17,006

23,938

-592

40,352

Effect of foreign exchange
adjustments

0

0

0

0

0

-4

0

-4

Transferred from associated companies

0

0

0

0

0

437

0

437

Appreciations to fair
value, net

4,913

6,587

1,207

12,707

-13,018

-9,957

-43 -23,018

Value adjustments at the
end of the year

8,901

21,001

572

30,474

3,988

14,414

-635

Fair value at the end of the
year

49,871

93,610

2,828 146,309

46,175

77,563

2,149 125,887

Public Equity

7,704

41,656

0

49,360

9,966

35,579

0

45,545

Private Equity

25,266

4,660

0

29,926

22,148

3,621

0

25,769

Venture capital

16,703

1,931

0

18,634

14,059

2,364

0

16,423

198

13,060

0

13,258

2

12,192

0

12,194

Real assets

0

11,431

2,828

14,259

0

6,731

2,149

8,880

Bonds

0

20,872

0

20,872

0

17,076

0

17,076

49,871

93,610

2,828 146,309

46,175

77,563

Total

Investments
Cost at the beginning of
the year

1,288 102,266

17,767

Split on asset classes

Credit

Financial assets

2,149 125,887

63

Annual Report 2023

Fair value measurement
by hierarchy
Level 1

9,174

56,276

0

65,450

14,252

46,055

0

60,307

Level 2

0

17,720

0

17,720

0

17,019

0

17,019

Level 3

40,697

19,614

2,828

63,139

31,923

14,489

2,149

48,561

49,871

93,610

2,828 146,309

46,175

77,563

2,149 125,887

At the beginning of the
year

31,923

14,489

2,149

48,561

32,276

13,919

696

46,891

Additions during the year

11,057

6,464

4

17,525

5,268

4,138

1,608

11,014

Disposals during the year

-5,056

-426

-532

-6,014

-2,069

-226

-127

-2,422

Gains through profit and
loss

3,950

-913

1,205

4,242

-2,456

599

-43

-1,900

Change in hierarchy due
to investments that completed an IPO during the
year

-1,177

0

0

-1,177

-1,096

0

0

-1,096

0

0

2

2

0

-3,941

15

-3,926

40,697

19,614

2,829

63,139

31,923

14,489

2,149

48,561

Change in the value not
based on observable market data (level 3)

Transferred

Accounting policy
The Group divides the financial assets into two main types: Life Science Investments and securities, and two minor types: other financial assets and
contract assets.
Life Science Investments are defined as direct or indirect investments in financial assets that are primarily related to either healthcare or bioindustrial segments.
Investments that do not meet the definition of the above category are defined as securities.
Financial assets that fall into the category of either Life Science Investments or securities are recognised in accordance with IFRS 9 at fair value
through profit and loss. Investments are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently adjusted to fair value.

Key accounting estimates and judgements
Life Science investments and Securities
Life Science Investments and Securities are valued at fair value if this can be determined with a sufficient degree of reliability. By nature, uncertainties exist regarding fair value assessment of investments not based on observable market data. Consequently, preparation of the financial statements requires the application of certain estimates and judgements. Management reviews and assesses the value of the individual investments on
an ongoing basis with specific and planned reviews of the total investment portfolio on a quarterly basis. Investments are initially recognised at fair
value and subsequently adjusted to fair value.
Fair value estimation
Fair value is the price that would be received by selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants
at the measurement date.
The Group has implemented fair value guidelines and procedures which ensure a consistent fair value measurement of each individual investment
over time. Moreover, the fair value guidelines provide a framework for reasonable, consistent and transparent selection of valuation methodologies for valuing the investments. The selection criteria are in line with the value hierarchy in IFRS 13.

64

Annual Report 2023

Hierarchy of fair value inputs
Investments measured at fair value are classified according to a fair value hierarchy depending on the inputs used in the valuation method. The fair
value hierarchy distinguishes between observable and unobservable inputs, which are classified at one of the following levels:
Level 1: Unadjusted quoted market prices for identical assets in an active market.
Level 2: Inputs other than quoted market prices included within level 1, which are observable either directly (i.e. as prices) or indirectly (i.e. derived
from prices). Quoted prices for similar assets are level 2 inputs.
Level 3: Inputs for the asset that are not based on observable market data.
Securities traded on active markets are classified at level 1. Securities traded on inactive markets are generally classified at level 2. Securities in
private unlisted operating companies are generally classified at level 3.
Investments in private investment companies are classified at level 2 or level 3, depending on the nature of their investment portfolios, their ability
to liquidate their underlying investments and any other restrictions on the disposition of the investments. If the investment can be redeemed at
the reported net asset value on the measurement date or in the near future, the investment is classified at level 2. Otherwise, the investment is
classified at level 3.
Policy for determining when transfers between levels are deemed to have occurred
Transfers to level 3 occur when quoted market prices (level 1) or other observable inputs (level 2) are no longer available. Transfers out of level 3
occur if quoted market prices (level 1) or other observable inputs (level 2) become available (e.g. when a private company goes public through an
IPO,) equity investments in the company transfers from level 3 to level 1 as the shares can be valued using the quoted market price (level 1).
Valuation method and inputs
The general principle applied in the selection of valuation approach maximises the use of observable inputs and minimises the use of unobservable inputs.
If a security trades in an active market, the closing price is applied. An active market is defined as one in which transactions for the security occur
with sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis.
Should a security not trade in an active market, it is initially booked and held at cost in the first twelve months succeeding the investment, unless
any material events occur within this timeframe. Beyond the twelve months window, the valuation methodology follows the following hierarchy:
When independent broker quotes representing contemporaneous trades exist, these will be applied in estimating the fair value of the security. If a
portfolio company has carried out any financing rounds within the last twelve months and the pricing in the financing round is likely to represent a
fair value, the fair value estimate is based on the price obtained in the financing round.
If neither independent broker quotes nor pricing from financing rounds are available, the fair value will be based on application of a modelling
approach, which again follows a strict hierarchy:
1.

If the company runs an established business with an identifiable stream of continuing earnings or cash flows that are considered to be
maintainable, and it is possible to identify comparable companies in terms of risk attributes and earnings growth prospects, the fair
value shall be based on application of the market approach (i.e. relevant multiples based on a set of comparable companies);

2.

If no comparable companies in terms of risk attributes and earnings growth prospects can be identified, the fair value shall be based on
application of an income approach (i.e. a discounted cash flow model);

3.

If the company does not run an established business with an identifiable stream of continuing earnings or cash flows that are maintainable, the fair value shall be based on a value trigger approach, by which the fair value changes based on the occurrence of value triggering
events.

Fair value measurement by hierarchy
Overview of investments by category at 31 December 2023:
DKK million

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Total

Public Equity

41,905

4,617

2,838

49,360

Private Equity

21

0

29,905

29,926

Venture capital

4,308

0

14,326

18,634

Credit

4,074

7,373

1,811

13,258

0

0

14,259

14,259

Real assets

65

Annual Report 2023

Bonds

15,142

5,730

0

20,872

Total investments

65,450

17,720

63,139

146,309

Total Life Science Investments

9,174

0

40,697

49,871

Total securities

56,276

17,720

19,614

93,610

0

0

2,828

2,828

65,450

17,720

63,139

146,309

DKK million

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Total

Public Equity

39,946

5,599

0

45,545

Private Equity

19

0

25,750

25,769

Venture capital

4,287

0

12,136

16,423

Credit

4,258

6,141

1,795

12,194

0

0

8,880

8,880

Bonds

11,797

5,279

0

17,076

Total investments

60,307

17,019

48,561

125,887

Total Life Science Investments

14,252

0

31,923

46,175

Total securities

46,055

17,019

14,489

77,563

0

0

2,149

2,149

60,307

17,019

48,561

125,887

Total other financial assets
Total
Overview of investments by category at 31 December 2022:

Real assets

Total other financial assets
Total

For the investments in unquoted equities, estimations of fair value rely substantially on non-observable input (level 3) such as pro forma adjusted
operating income multiplied by relevant multiples (e.g. EV/EBITDA) for a set of comparable companies less net interest-bearing debt. If comparable companies are not available or applicable, fair value estimation will rely on other inputs such as projected cash flows discounted with a
weighted average cost of capital (WACC).

Valuation methodology

Estimation and assumptions

Value
DKK
million
2023

Income-based approaches Discounted cash flows

Cash flows and discount rates

7,045

4,496

Market-based approaches Trading multiples

Selection of comparable companies,
trading multiples, sales and profit forecast

11,877

7,203

Valuation approach

Value
DKK
million
2022

Value trigger approach

Relative adjustments based
on pre-defined
value triggers

Relative adjustment to previous valuation

9,732

6,262

Financing round approach

Price at recent financing
round

N/A

3,113

3,976

LP approach

Adjusted reported NAV

Latest reported NAV adjusted for capital calls, capital returns
and pricing development (if relevant)

27,267

23,284

Cost approach

Cost at recent transaction

N/A

4,105

3,340

63,139

48,561

Total

Management reviews and assesses the value of the individual investments on an ongoing basis with specific and planned reviews of the total Investment Portfolio on a quarterly basis.
The discount rates used range from 5% to 18% whereas the EV/EBITDA multiples are in the range from 16x to 22x. These ranges should be seen
as a result of our diversified investment portfolio.
The following table details the applied valuation methods for determination of fair value for each asset class:

66

Annual Report 2023

Asset class

Public Equity

Private Equity
(direct)

Valuation methodology
used

Unobservable input used

Sensitivity in fair value in case of changes in unobservable input

• Closing prices according to exchange markets
• Estimated market price
based on observable input*

• N/A

• N/A

• Discounted cash flows
• Trading multiples
• Cost at recent transaction

• Cash flows and discount rates
• Trading multiples
• Cost at recent transaction

• If trading multiples decreased by 10%, the fair
value would decrease by DKK 1,319 million (2022:
DKK 1,142 million)
• If the WACC increased by 0.25pp, the fair value
would decrease by DKK 131 million (2022: DKK 3
million)

Private Equity
(LP)

• Adjusted reported NAV • Latest reported NAV adjusted for capital
calls, capital returns and pricing development (if relevant)

• N/A

Venture Capital
(Public)

• Closing prices according to exchange markets

• N/A

• N/A

• Cash flows and discount rates
• Trading multiples
• Value trigger assumptions
• Cost at recent transaction
• Price at financing round

• If trading multiples decreased by 10%, the fair
value would decrease by DKK 21 million (2022:
DKK 17 million)
• If the WACC increased by 0.25pp, the fair value
would decrease by DKK 0 (2022: DKK 0)

• Discounted cash flows
• Trading multiples
• Relative adjustment
Venture Capital based on pre(Private – direct) defined value triggers
• Cost at recent transaction
• Financing round
Venture Capital
(Private - LP)

• Adjusted reported NAV • Latest reported NAV adjusted for capital
calls, capital returns and pricing development (if relevant)

• N/A

• N/A

Credit

• Closing prices according to exchange markets
• Estimated market price
based on observable input

Credit (Private LP)

• Adjusted reported NAV • Latest reported NAV adjusted for capital
calls, capital returns and pricing development (if relevant)

• N/A

• N/A

• N/A

EM debt

• Closing prices according to exchan
• Estimated market price
based on observable input

• Cash flows and discount rates
• Price at financing round

• If the WACC increased by 0.25pp, the fair value
would decrease by DKK 35 million (2022: DKK 142
million)

• Discounted cash flows
Real Assets (Pri• Cost at recent
vate – Direct)

• N/A

Real Assets (Private – LP)

• Adjusted reported NAV • Latest reported NAV adjusted for capital
calls, capital returns and pricing development (if relevant)

• N/A

• N/A

Bonds

• Closing prices according to exchange markets
• Estimated market price
based on observable input

• N/A

* The fair value of certain total return swaps and bonds included as collateral under Public Equity is estimated based on observable input.

67

Annual Report 2023

Inventories
DKK million

2023

2022

Raw materials

10,870

7,816

Work in progress

19,373

15,387

Finished goods

10,750

9,340

Write-downs at year-end

-2,803

-1,957

Total inventories

38,190

30,586

Write-down at the beginning of the year

1,957

2,453

Write-downs during the year

1,996

1,242

Utilisation of write-downs

-805

-1,523

Reversal of write-downs

-349

-215

Write-downs at the end of the year

2,799

1,957

Indirect production costs included in the work in progress and finished goods

14,238

11,716

All write-downs in both 2023 and 2022 mainly relate to fully impaired inventory.
A part of the reversal of write-downs is attributable to written-down inventory being reused in production.

Accounting policy
Inventories are stated at cost or net realisable value, whichever is lower.
Cost is determined using the first-in, first-out method. Cost comprises direct production costs such as raw materials, consumables and labour as
well as indirect production costs.
Production costs for work in progress and finished goods include indirect production costs such as employee costs, depreciation, maintenance,
etc. If the expected sales price less completion costs to execute sales (net realisable value) is lower than the carrying amount, a write-down is recognised for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds its net realisable value.
Inventory manufactured prior to regulatory approval (prelaunch inventory) is capitalised but immediately provided for, until there is a high probability of regulatory approval for the product. A write-down is made against inventory, and the cost is recognised in the income statement as research and development costs. Once there is a high probability of regulatory approval being obtained, the write-down is reversed, up to no more
than the original cost.

Key accounting estimates and judgements
Inventories are stated at cost or net realisable value, whichever is lower. Cost is determined using the first-in, first-out method. Cost comprises
direct production costs such as raw materials, consumables and labour as well as indirect production costs. Production costs for work in progress
and finished goods include indirect production costs such as employee costs, depreciation, maintenance, etc.
Indirect production costs are measured using a standard cost method. This is reviewed regularly to ensure relevant measures of capacity utilisation, production lead time, cost base and other relevant factors, hence inventory is valued at actual cost. When calculating total inventory, Management must make judgements about cost of production, standard cost variances and idle capacity in estimating indirect production costs for capitalisation. Changes in the parameters for calculation of indirect production costs could have an impact on the gross margin and the overall valuation of inventories.

68

Annual Report 2023

Trade receivables
DKK million

2023

2022

Gross carrying amount

74,140

59,116

Loss allowance

-2,200

-2,024

Carrying amount at the end of the year

71,940

57,092

Carrying amount at the beginning of the year

2,024

1,609

Reversal of allowance on realised losses

-185

-59

Change of allowance during the year

495

310

Effect of exchange rate adjustments

-109

-111

Realised loss

-28

-35

3

310

Allowance at the end of the year

2,200

2,024

Not yet due

69,333

55,330

Due between 1-90 days

2,107

1,213

More than 90 days due

500

549

71,940

57,092

Movements in allowance for doubtful trade receivables

Additions from acquisition of companies

Carrying amount at the end of the year
Accounting policy

Trade receivables are initially recognised at transaction price and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method,
less allowance for doubtful trade receivables. The allocation of trade receivables and allowance for trade receivables is based on the location of
the customer.
Allowance for expected credit loss for trade receivables
Trade receivables are initially recognised at transaction price and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method,
less allowance for doubtful trade receivables. The allocation of trade receivables and allowance for trade receivables is based on the location of
the customer.
The allowance for expected credit losses for trade receivables and contract assets is based on historical credit loss experience combined with
forward-looking information on macroeconomic factors affecting the credit risk. The expected loss rates are updated at each reporting date.

Other provisions
DKK million

2023

2022

Total

Total

Provisions for
sales rebates

Provisions for
product returns

Retirement benefit obligations

Provisions for
legal disputes

Other
provisions

At the beginning of the year

69,559

1,039

820

2,408

2,266

76,092

57,720

Additional provisions, including increases to existing provisions

285,283

1,010

2

1,961

814

289,070

207,886

Amount used during the year

-250,316

-532

-8

-230

-267 -251,353 -190,348

Adjustments, including unused
amounts reversed during the year

-2,379

12

-20

-261

-436

-3,084

-2,209

Effect of exchange rate adjustment

-2,208

11

0

-62

-27

-2,286

3,043

At the end of the year

99,939

1,540

794

3,816

2,350

108,439

76,092

69

Annual Report 2023

Non-current liabilities

451

613

749

3,816

1,895

7,524

5,471

Current liabilities

99,488

927

45

0

455

100,915

70,621

At the end of the year

99,939

1,540

794

3,816

2,350

108,439

76,092

For non-current liabilities, provisions for sales rebates are expected to be settled after one year, provisions for product returns will be utilised in
2024 and 2025. In the case of provisions for legal disputes, the timing of settlement cannot be determined.
Provisions for sales rebates
Provisions for sales rebates are related to US Managed Care, Medicare, Medicaid, 340B Drug Pricing Program and other types of US rebates, as
well as rebates in a number of European countries and Canada.
Provision for retirement benefit obligations
The Group operates a number of defined contribution plans throughout the world. Group companies’ contributions to the defined contribution
plans are charged to the income statement in the year to which they relate. The yearly costs for defined benefit plans are determined using the
projected unit credit method. This reflects services rendered by employees to the valuation dates and is based on actuarial assumptions primarily
regarding discount rates used in determining the present value of benefits and projected rates of remuneration growth. Discount rates are based
on the market yields of high-rated corporate bonds in the country concerned.
The net obligation recognised in the balance sheet is reported as non-current liabilities.
Other provisions
Other provisions consist of various types of provisions, including obligations in relation to employee benefits such as jubilee benefits, companyowned life insurance, etc.
Accounting policy
Provision for sales rebates
Provisions for sales rebates and discounts granted to government agencies, wholesalers, retail pharmacies, Managed Care and other customers
are recorded at the time the related revenues are recorded or when the incentives are offered. Provisions are calculated based on historical experience and the specific terms in the individual agreements. Unsettled rebates are recognised as provisions when the timing or amount is uncertain.
Where absolute amounts are known, the rebates are recognised as other liabilities.
Provision for product returns
The Group issues credit notes for expired goods as a part of normal business. Where there is historical experience or a reasonably accurate estimate of expected future returns can otherwise be made, a provision for estimated product returns is recorded. The provision is measured at gross
sales value.
Retirement benefit obligations
The Group operates a number of defined contribution plans throughout the world.
The costs for the year for defined benefit plans are determined using the projected unit credit method. This reflects services rendered by employees to the valuation dates and is based on actuarial assumptions primarily regarding discount rates used in determining the present value of benefits and projected rates of remuneration growth. Discount rates are based on the market yields of high-rated corporate bonds in the country concerned.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are charged or credited to other comprehensive income in the period in which they arise. Past service costs are recognised immediately in the income statement. Pension plan assets are only
recognised to the extent that the Group can derive future economic benefits such as refunds from the plan or reductions of future contributions.
Costs recognised for retirement benefits are included in cost of goods sold, sales and distribution costs, research and development costs, and
administrative costs. The net obligation recognised in the balance sheet is reported as non-current liabilities.
Actuarial valuations are performed annually for all major defined benefit plans. Assumptions regarding future mortality are based on actuarial advice in accordance with published statistics and experience in each country. Other assumptions such as medical cost trend rate and inflation are
also considered in the calculation. Significant actuarial assumptions for the determination of the retirement benefit obligation (not considering plan
assets) are discount rate and expected future remuneration increases. The sensitivity analysis has been determined based on reasonably likely
changes in the assumptions occurring at the end of the period.
The net obligation recognised in the balance sheet is reported as non-current liabilities.

70

Annual Report 2023

Provision for legal disputes
Provisions for legal disputes are recognised where a legal or constructive obligation has been incurred because of past events and it is probable
that there will be an outflow of resources that can be reliably estimated. In this case, the Group arrives at an estimate based on an evaluation of the
most likely outcome. Disputes for which no reliable estimate can be made are disclosed as contingent liabilities.
Provisions are measured at the present value of the anticipated expenditure for settlement. This is calculated using a pre-tax discount rate that
reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the obligation. The increase in the provision for interest is
recognised as a financial expense

Key accounting estimates and judgements
Provisions for legal disputes consist of various types of provision linked to ongoing legal disputes. Management makes estimates regarding provisions and contingencies, including the probability of pending and potential future litigation outcomes. These are by nature dependent on inherently uncertain future events. When determining likely outcomes of litigation etc., Management considers the input of external counsels on each
case as well as known outcomes in case law.
Although Management believes that the total provisions for legal proceedings are adequate based on currently available information, there can be
no assurance that there will not be any changes in facts or matters, or that any future lawsuits, claims, proceedings or investigations will not be
material.

Borrowings
DKK million

2023

2022

Within 1 year

11,218

9,150

1-5 years

37,270

31,240

More than 5 years

33,104

37,838

Total

81,592

78,228

Carrying amount at the end of the year

70,690

64,949

Non-current liabilities

60,581

57,411

Current liabilities

10,109

7,538

Carrying amount at the end of the year

70,690

64,949

Fair value of borrowings at the end of the year

70,343

62,874

Liabilities from financing activities 1 January

64,949

41,241

Additions from acqusition of companies

1,663

22,911

Financing cash flows

1,372

-1,266

-67

153

Other changes

2,773

1,910

Liabilities from financing activities 31 December

70,690

64,949

Reconciliation of liabilities from financing activities

Currency translation adjustments

71

Annual Report 2023

Other liabilties
Other liabilities primarily comprise employee cost payables, payables related to non-current assets, and sales rebates.

Other non-cash items
DKK million

2023

2022

Unrealised (gain)/loss on securities

-9,143

17,586

Unrealised (gain)/loss on currency

-136

0

Increase(decrease) in provisions

32,228

19,076

Share-based payment costs

2,353

1,666

Other

-1,791

1,108

Total other non-cash items

23,511

39,436

2023

2022

Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year

19,085

15,949

Credit facility at the end of the year (overdrafts)

-2

-24

19,083

15,925

Cash and cash equivalents
DKK million

Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year in the cash flow statement
Accounting policy

The cash flow statement is presented in accordance with the indirect method commencing with net profit for the year. Cash flows in foreign currencies are translated to DKK at the average exchange rate for the respective year.
Cash from operating activities converts income statement items from the accrual basis of accounting to cash basis. As such, starting with net profit,
non-cash items are reversed, and actual payments included. The change in working capital is also considered, as this shows the development in
money tied up in the balance sheet.
Cash from investing activities shows payments related to the purchase and sale of long-term investments. This includes fixed assets such as construction of new production sites, intangible assets such as patents and licenses, and financial assets.
Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash offset by short-term bank overdrafts. Where short-term bank overdrafts are consistently overdrawn,
they are excluded from cash and cash equivalents. The movement in such facilities is presented under financing activities in the cash flow statement.
Financial reserves comprise the sum of cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year and undrawn committed credit and loan facilities, with a
maturity of more than 12 months, less loans and bank overdrafts classified as liabilities arising from financing activities contractually obliged for
repayment within 12 months of the balance sheet date.

72

Annual Report 2023

Derivative financial instruments
DKK million

2023
Contract
amount at
year-end

2022

Positive
fair value
at yearend

Negative
fair value
at yearend

Contract
amount at
year-end

Positive
fair value
at yearend

Negative
fair value
at yearend

Forward contracts, cash flow hedges
Forward contracts, net:
USD

106,623

1,633

198

63,293

1,648

949

JPY, GBP, CHN and other

20,318

295

120

10,762

373

62

126,941

1,928

318

74,055

2,021

1,011

EUR/EUR

0

0

0

174

16

0

DKK/DKK

596

2

0

0

0

0

USD/USD

300

0

3

924

32

0

896

2

0

1,098

48

0

USD

66,580

335

946

38,660

639

1,962

Other

28,241

128

56

4,169

152

38

94,821

463

1,002

42,829

791

2,000

222,658

2,393

1,323

117,982

2,860

3,011

463

1,002

797

2,000

1,930

321

2,063

1,011

2,393

1,323

2,860

3,011

Currency and interest rate swaps:

Forward contracts, fair value hedges
Forward contracts:

Total derivative financial instruments
Recognised in the income statement
Recognised in other comprehensive income
Included in the balance sheet as :
Derivative financial instruments

The Group uses financial instruments to reduce the impact of foreign exchange on financial results. the derivative financial instruments are used to
manage the exposure to market risk. None of the derivatives are held for trading. The Group uses forward exchange contracts and to a lesser extent, currency options to hedge forecast transactions, asset and liabilities. The overall policy is to hedge the majority of total currency exposure.
Net investments in foreign subsidiaries are currently not hedged.
The table above states the fair value of the Group's derivative financial instruments divided into types of hedges and main currencies.
On initiation of the contract, the Group designates each derivative financial contract that qualifies for hedge accounting as either hedges of fair
value of a recognised asset or liability (fair value hedge) or hedges of the fair value of a forecast financial transaction (cash flow hedge). All contracts
are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently remeasured at fair value at the end of the reporting period.
Accounting policy
The Group uses financial instruments to reduce the impact of foreign exchange on financial results.
Use of derivative financial instruments
The derivative financial instruments are used to manage the exposure to market risk. None of the derivatives are held for trading.

73

Annual Report 2023

The Group uses forward exchange contracts and, to a lesser extent, currency options to hedge forecast transactions, assets and liabilities. The
overall policy is to hedge the majority of total currency exposure.
Net investments in foreign subsidiaries are currently not hedged.
Initial recognition and measurement
On initiation of the contract, the Group designates each derivative financial contract that qualifies for hedge accounting as one of:
hedges of the fair value of a recognised asset or liability (fair value hedge);
hedges of the fair value of a forecast financial transaction (cash flow hedge).
All contracts are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently remeasured at fair value at the end of the reporting period.
Fair value hedges
Value adjustments of fair value hedges are recognised in the income statement along with any value adjustments of the hedged asset or liability
that are attributable to the hedged risk.
Cash flow hedges
Value adjustments of the effective part of cash flow hedges are recognised directly in other comprehensive income. The cumulative value adjustment of these contracts is transferred from other comprehensive income to the income statement when the hedged transaction is recognised in
the income statement.
For cash flow hedges of foreign currency risk on highly probable non-financial asset purchases, the cumulative value adjustments are transferred
directly from the cash flow hedge reserve to the initial cost of the asset when recognised.
Discontinuance of cash flow hedging
When a hedging instrument expires or is sold, or when a hedge no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting, any cumulative gain or loss
existing in equity at that time remains in equity and is recognised when the forecast transaction is ultimately recognised in the income statement.
When a forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur, the cumulative gain or loss that was reported in equity is immediately transferred to
the income statement under financial income or financial expenses.
Fair value determination
The fair value of derivative financial instruments is measured on the basis of quoted market prices of financial instruments traded in active markets.
If an active market exists, the fair value is based on the most recently observed market price at the end of the reporting period.
If a financial instrument is quoted in a market that is not active, the Group bases its valuation on the most recent transaction price.
Adjustment is made for subsequent changes in market conditions, for instance by including transactions in similar financial instruments assumed
to be motivated by normal business considerations. If an active market does not exist, the fair value of standard and simple financial instruments,
such as foreign exchange forward contracts, interest rate swaps, currency swaps and unlisted bonds, is measured according to generally accepted
valuation techniques. Market-based parameters are used to measure the fair value.

Commitments and contingent liabilities
Contractual obligations
DKK million

2023

2022

Purchase obligations, tangible assets

6,216

4,065

20,395

21,193

The purchase obligations primarily relate to purchase agreements regarding tangible assets. The Group expects
to fund these commitments with existing cash and cash flow from operations.
Purchase obligations, financial assets
The purchase obligations primarily concern purchase agreements in connection with investments in financial
fixed assets. The Group expects to fund these commitments through cash flow from operations.

74

Annual Report 2023

Purchase obligation medical equipment and consumer goods

51,941

37,217

63,410

26,555

1,878

1,829

429

436

The purchase obligations concern purchase agreements regarding medical equipment and consumer goods.
The Group expects to fund these commitments with existing cash and cash flow from operations.
Purchase obligation research and development
The Group is engaged in research and development projects with external companies.
Other guarantees
Other guarantees primarily relate to performance guarantees.
Collateral
Booked value of property, plant and equipment.
Contingent liabilities
The Group is currently involved in pending litigations, claims and investigations arising out of the normal conduct of its business. While provisions
that Management deems to be reasonable and appropriate have been made for probable losses, there are uncertainties connected with these
estimates.
In connection with the proposed merger of Novozymes and Chr. Hansen, the Group had made certain commitments under given terms and conditions in support of the merger. The merger was completed end January 2024.
Pending litigation against Novo Nordisk
Since January 2021, Novo Nordisk has made a number of changes to its policy in the US related to facilitating delivery of its discounted medicines
to commercial pharmacies that contract with covered entities participating in the 340B Drug Pricing Program. On 30 January 2023, the US Court of
Appeals for the Third Circuit issued a ruling holding that Novo Nordisk’s drug distribution policy was consistent with the 340B statute. However,
rulings in similar cases involving other manufacturers are pending before the US Courts of Appeals for the Seventh and DC Circuits, and such cases
may be subject to further discretionary appellate review before the US Supreme Court. Depending on the outcome of any subsequent rulings and
appeals in these matters, there may be a material impact on Novo Nordisk’s financial position, net sales and cash flow.
Mosaic Health Inc. and Central Virginia Health Services, Inc. (both 340B covered entities) filed a putative class action lawsuit in Federal Court in
New York against Novo Nordisk, Eli Lilly and Company, Sanofi and AstraZeneca alleging a conspiracy among the manufacturers to artificially fix
prices of diabetes medications through changes to their policies relating to the distribution of 340B drugs. The lawsuit was subsequently dismissed by the Court on 2 September 2022. Plaintiffs have filed an amended complaint. Novo Nordisk does not expect this matter to have a material impact on Novo Nordisk’s financial position, operating profit or cash flow.
Novo Nordisk is currently defending several lawsuits, including putative class actions, relating to the pricing of diabetes medicines in the US. The
first lawsuit was filed in 2017 and in August 2023 a multi-district litigation was created in the United States District court for the District of New
Jersey. Nearly all pending matters also name Eli Lilly and Company and Sanofi as defendants, while certain matters also name Pharmacy Benefit
Managers (PBMs) and related entities. Plaintiffs generally allege that the manufacturers and PBMs colluded to artificially inflate list prices paid by
consumers for diabetes products, while offering reduced prices to PBMs through rebates used to secure formulary access. Novo Nordisk does not
expect the lawsuits to have a material impact on Novo Nordisk’s financial position, operating profit or cash flow.
In 2016, Novo Nordisk received a Civil Investigative Demand (CID) from the US Department of Justice (DOJ) relating to potential off-label marketing of NovoSeven® (including high dose and for prophylactic use) and interactions with physicians and patients. The DOJ investigation was likely
prompted by a lawsuit filed in 2015 by a former Novo Nordisk employee, who alleged Novo Nordisk caused the submission of false claims to
Medicare, Medicaid, Federal Employees Health Benefits Program and private insurers in California as a result of the same conduct that was the
subject of the DOJ CID. In May 2023, at the Plaintiffs’ request, the case was transferred to the United States District Court for the Western District of
Washington. Following transfer, in July 2023, Plaintiffs filed a motion to revive their nationwide Medicare claims and their Delaware Medicaid
claims. Novo Nordisk filed a motion to dismiss these claims. Novo Nordisk does not expect the lawsuits to have a material impact on Novo
Nordisk’s financial position, operating profit or cash flow.
Novo Nordisk, along with Eli Lilly, are defendants in numerous product liability lawsuits (including in the US) related to the use of GLP-1-based
treatments. Plaintiffs have alleged that the use of these treatments, including Ozempic®, Wegovy® and Rybelsus®, have caused various gastrointestinal and other injuries. Novo Nordisk is taking actions to address the lawsuits. Novo Nordisk does not expect these lawsuits to have a material
impact on Novo Nordisk’s financial position, operating profit or cash flow. Pending claims against Novo Nordisk and Investigations involving Novo
Nordisk Novo Nordisk has received Civil Investigative Demands (CIDs) or subpoenas from several US authorities including Attorneys General

75

Annual Report 2023

from the states of Minnesota, New Mexico, Washington, Colorado, Vermont, Texas and the US Federal Trade Commission that call for the production of documents and information relating to, among other things, the company’s trade practices relating to its insulin and GLP-1-based products.
Novo Nordisk is cooperating with the relevant government authorities in each of these investigative matters and does not expect these matters to
have a material impact on Novo Nordisk’s financial position, operating profit or cash flow.
In December 2021, Novo Nordisk received a CID from the DOJ relating to the company’s financial relationships with healthcare professional and
prescriptions for Ozempic® and Rybelsus® during the period of 1 January 2016 to present. Novo Nordisk is cooperating with the DOJ in this investigation and does not expect this matter to have a material impact on Novo Nordisk’s financial position, operating profit or cash flow.
Other contingent liabilities
In addition to the above, the Group is engaged in certain litigation proceedings and various ongoing audits and investigations. In the opinion of
Management, neither settlement or continuation of such proceedings, nor such pending audits and investigations, are expected to have a material
effect on the Group's financial position, operating profit or cash flow.

Share-based payment schemes
Novo Nordisk Foundation Group operates share-based payment schemes in Novo Nordisk, Novozymes, NNIT, Sonion, Xellia and other subgroups to motivate and retain a qualified management and to ensure common goals for management and shareholders. The sharebased payment
schemes in Sonion, Xellia and other sub-groups are not material for the Group as a whole.
The allocation of share options/restricted stock units under the Group’s share-based payment schemes is conditional on the fulfilment of shareholder value targets, as defined by the Boards in accordance with the companies’ long-term financial targets. The exercise price for options in the
listed companies corresponds to the market share price at the time of issue/establishment of the scheme.
The schemes are primarily equity-settled, share-based compensation plans. The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the
grant of shares is recognised as an expense and allocated over the vesting period.

Long-term share-based incentive programme
Novo Nordisk, Novozymes and NNIT.
There are schemes for management board and management group.
DKK million

2023

2022

Fair market value share options - conditions Novo Nordisk
The fair value is fixed at the grant date and adjusted for expected dividends during the vesting period. Adjustments relating to
prior years are included in the income statement in the year of adjustment.
Expensed in the income statement, DKK million

2,149 1,539

Fair market value share options - conditions Novozymes
The fair value is measured using the Black–Scholes option-pricing model.
Expensed in the income statement, DKK million

151

127

1

1

Fair market value share options - conditions NNIT
Shares are recognised over the four-year vesting period at the market value at the grant date.
Expensed in the income statement, DKK million

76

Annual Report 2023

Number of outstanding share options/restricted stock units(RSU)

Novo Nordisk A/S

Novozymes A/S

NNIT A/S

(RSU)

(share options)

(RSU)

million

thousand

Outstanding at the beginning of the year 2023

21.4

7,276,257

141

Outstanding at the end of the year 2023

18.9

7,482,830

209

Outstanding at the beginning of the year 2022

19.8

7,010,328

190

Outstanding at the end of the year 2022

21.4

7,276,257

141

Number of awarded and outstanding shares
Novo Nordisk
Employees' 100 year anniversary programme

Shares for Management Board

Shares for Management Group below Management Board

Shares allocated to individual employees

2023

2023

2022

2023

2022

2023

2022

Preliminary number of shares
to be allocated (million)

3.0

0.6

0.7

3.1

3.3

0.3

0.8

Fair value per restricted stock
unit at grant date (DKK)

446

456

320

456

320

544

371

2023 to

2023 to
2025

2022 to
2024

2023 to

2022 to

2025

2024

2023 to
2026

2022 to
2025

Allocation date

Aug 2026 Feb 2026 Feb 2025

Feb 2026

Feb 2025

2026

2025

Amortisation period

3.5 years

3 years

3 years

3 years

3 years

Performance and vesting period

2026

3 years

3 years

Accounting policy
Novo Nordisk operates equity-settled, share-based compensation plans. The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the
grant of shares is recognised as an expense and allocated over the vesting period.
The total amount to be expensed over the vesting period is determined by reference to the fair value of the shares granted, excluding the impact
of any non-market vesting conditions. The fair value is fixed at the grant date and adjusted for expected dividends during the vesting period. Nonmarket vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of shares that are expected to vest. At the end of each reporting period,
the Group revises its estimates of the number of shares expected to vest. The Group recognises the impact of the revision of the original estimates,
if any, in the income statement and in a corresponding adjustment to equity (change in proceeds) over the remaining vesting period. Adjustments
relating to prior years are included in the income.

Financial risks
Due to its global activities, several financial risk factors affect the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group’s income and balance. The Group has centralised the control of its financial risks in Novo Nordisk A/S, Novozymes A/S and Novo Holdings A/S. The respective boards of these companies
have established and approved the general framework for the financial risk management described in the companies’ financial and investment
policies.

Foreign exchange risk
Currency risk arises due to imbalances between income and costs in each individual currency and because the Group has more assets than liabilities in foreign currencies in connection with global operations. The overall objective of foreign exchange risk management is to reduce the

77

Annual Report 2023

short-term negative impact of exchange rate fluctuations on earnings and cash flow, thereby contributing to the predictability of the financial
results.
The Group hedges existing assets and liabilities in key currencies as well as future expected cash flows up to a maximum of 24 months forward.
Hedging is managed by entering derivatives like forward contracts, currency options and swaps. Hedge effectiveness is assessed regularly.
The foreign exchange risk is most significant in USD, GBP and CNY, while the EUR exchange rate risk is regarded as low because of Denmark's
fixed exchange rate policy towards EUR.
The sensitivity analysis below shows the impact on net profit of a 5% change in DKK versus the key currencies to which the Group was exposed
at end of year:

2023

2022

USD

9,833

7,203

GBP

983

921

CNY

500

500

For all other currencies together, a change of 5% would impact the net profit by less than DKK 1,000 million.
Average hedge rate
The average hedge rate for USD cash flow hedges is 676 at the end of 2023 (699 at the end of 2022).
Interest rate risk
Interest rate exposure arises in relation to interest-bearing investments and there is the risk of financial loss from a change in interest rates.
The Group's policy is to allocate most of the interest-bearing asset exposure to Danish government bonds and domestic mortgage credit bonds,
and a minority to high yield debt. The interest rate risk is not hedged through derivatives, but the duration of the portfolio is adjusted to a desired
exposure.
Credit risk
Credit risk occurs in relation to bonds and other contractual obligations and is the risk of financial loss from the failure of a counterparty to meet
the contractual obligations.
The Group's policy is to limit the risk of financial loss from counterparty default by having most of the interest-bearing investments in Danish
government bonds and domestic mortgage credit bonds with low credit risk and a minor share in high yield debt with lower credit rating. Credit
ratings are considered and monitored by the investment teams to evaluate the risk of loss from default. Investments are made across a variety of
issuers to reduce the concentration of credit risk. Based on individual consideration of each asset, it is decided whether the credit risk should be
hedged through derivatives.
The Group has no significant concentration of credit risk related to trade receivables or other receivables and prepayments, as the exposure is
spread over many counterparties and customers.
Liquidity risk
The liquidity risk is considered low. The Group ensures the availability of the required liquidity through a combination of cash management,
highly liquid investment portfolios and both uncommitted and committed credit facilities.
Price risk
Price risk is the risk that the value of the investment portfolio will fluctuate due to changes in the market price, caused by factors specific to the
individual investment, the sector in which the investment operates or factors generally affecting all similar investments traded in the market. To
minimise the price risk while still achieving an attractive return, the investment portfolio is allocated to a predefined set of risk tolerances levels
with specific risk measures. The defined risk measures and portfolio allocation are monitored monthly.

Related party transactions
Novo Holdings A/S, the Novo Nordisk Group, the Novozymes Group, the NNIT Group, the Xellia Group, the Sonion Group, the Altasciences
Group, the BBI Group, the Ritedose Group, the Medical Knowledge Group, the KabaFusion Group, the Ellab Group, the Dades Group, other subsidiaries, associated companies and the boards and executive managements of these companies, including the Novo Nordisk Foundation, are
considered to be related parties. There have not been any significant transactions with related parties. Fees to the executive management are

78

Annual Report 2023

stated in note 3 of the Group Annual Report. All agreements have been negotiated on market-based terms, and most of the agreements are valid
for one year.

Subsidiaries with significant non-controlling interest
2023

Novo Nordisk A/S

Novozymes A/S

71.6%

70.4%

Net sales

232,261

17,899

Net profit for the year

83,683

3,039

Other comprehensive income

-1,160

-554

Total comprehensive income

82,523

2,485

Non-controlling share of total comprehensive income

59,103

1,749

Non-current assets

174,840

18,929

Current assets

139,646

9,462

Non-current liabilities

38,270

6,778

Current liabilities

169,655

7,262

Non-controlling share of equity

76,319

10,211

Dividends

31,767

2,856

Non-controlling share of dividends

22,752

2,010

Cash flow from operating activities

108,908

4,152

Cash flow from investing activities

-43,892

-2,133

Cash flow from financing activities

-63,158

-1,889

Novo Nordisk A/S

Novozymes A/S

71.6%

74.0%

Net sales

176,954

17,553

Net profit for the year

55,525

3,686

Other comprehensive income

4,778

253

Total comprehensive income

60,303

3,939

Non-controlling share of total comprehensive income

43,159

2,907

Non-current assets

133,063

18,742

Current assets

108,194

9,241

Non-current liabilities

36,831

6,792

Current liabilities

120,940

6,963

Non-controlling share of equity

59,751

10,630

Dividends

25,303

1,525

Non-controlling share of dividends

18,096

1,129

Non-controlling interest

Other non-controlling interests

Total

-699

60,153

11,601

98,131

75

24,837

Other non-controlling interest

Total

198

46,264

10,861

81,242

93

19,318

Total comprehensive income:

Balance

Dividends

Cash flow

2022
Non-controlling interest
Total comprehensive income:

Balance

Dividends

79

Annual Report 2023

Cash flow
Cash flow from operating activities

78,887

4,006

Cash flow from investing activities

-24,918

-2,672

Cash flow from financing activities

-51,797

-1,250

Assets held for sale
DKK million

2023

2022

Intangibles assets

0

86

Tangible assets

332

475

Deferred taxes

0

19

Deposits

0

7

Transition cost

0

80

Trade receivables

0

234

Work in progress

0

82

Prepayments

0

68

332

1,051

Employee benefit obligations

0

1

Prepayments received, transition cost

0

46

Prepayments received, work in progress

0

30

Employee costs payables

0

85

Tax payables

0

22

Other current liabilities

0

15

0

199

332

852

Cost at the end of the year

Liabilities directly associated with the assets classified as held for sale
Net assets classified as held for sale
Assets and liabilities directly associated with assets classified as held for sale relates to Novozymes in 2023 and NNIT in 2022.
Accounting policy

Assets classified as held for sale comprise assets and liabilities for which it is highly likely that the value will be recovered through a sale within 12
months rather than through continued use. Assets and liabilities classified as held for sale are measured at the lower of the carrying amount and
fair value less cost to sell at the classification date as “held for sale”. Assets held for sale are not depreciated. Impairment losses arising on first classification as “held for sale” and gains and losses from the subsequent measurement is recognized in the income statement under the items they
concern.

Events after the reporting date
The merger of Novozymes and Chr. Hansen was completed on 29 January 2024.
The Group has entered into an agreement to acquire Catalent Inc. in an all-cash transaction. The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions. The total transaction is valuing Catalent at USD 16.5 billion.
No other events of importance to the consolidated financial statements have occurred after the reporting date.

80

Annual Report 2023

Grants payable
DKK million

2023

2022

Non-current liabilities

15,820

15,205

Current liabilities

6,702

5,497

Carrying amount at the end of the year

22,522

20,702

Within 1 year

6,702

5,497

1-5 years

13,178

12,146

More than 5 years

2,642

3,059

22,522

20,702

Expected pay out of the Grant liability

81

Annual Report 2023

Group companies
Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

Novo Holdings A/S

Denmark

100

NNF India A/S

Denmark

100

Quantum Foundry P/S

Denmark

100

NNF General Partner ApS

Denmark

100

Novo Nordisk Foundation Cellerator P/S

Denmark

100

NVAC P/S

Denmark

100

Novo Nordisk A/S

Denmark

28.1/77.1

Novozymes A/S

Denmark

29.2/74.0

NNIT A/S

Denmark

33.5

21st.Bio A/S

Denmark

52

Acesion Pharma ApS

Denmark

57

Aloop Therapeutics ApS

Denmark

100

Altasciences HoldCo A/S

Denmark

100

Antraka ApS

Denmark

100

Arya BidCo Ltd.

UK

100

Availity HoldCo A/S

Denmark

100

Avilex Pharma ApS

Denmark

56

BBI HoldCo A/S

Denmark

100

BiOrigin ApS

Denmark

100

Claris Biotherapeutics, Inc.

USA

53

Dades A/S

Denmark

58

Co A/S

Denmark

64

Ejendomsselskabet Novo Holdings P/S

Denmark

100

Ejendomsselskabet Novo Holdings Komplementar ApS

Denmark

100

ENV HoldCo A/S i likvidation

Denmark

100

ERT HoldCo A/S

Denmark

100

HyperBio Therapeutics ApS

Denmark

100

Indkøbsselskabet Novo Holdings A/S

Denmark

100

Komplementarselskabet Novo Capital Investors ApS

Denmark

100

NH Capital Investors US Inc.

USA

100

NH Kronos GP, LLC

USA

100

NH Kronos Ultimate Holdings, LP

USA

89

Novo 1999 Advisory Shanghai Ltd.

China

100

Novo Capital Investors P/S

Denmakr

100

Novo DP2, Inc.

USA

100

Novo Holdings Equity Asia Pte. Ltd.

Singapore

100

Novo Holdings Invest Asia A/S

Denmark

100

Novo Holdings US Inc.

USA

100

Novo Nordisk Foundation subsidiaries

Novo Holdings A/S subsidiaries

Echo Top

(continues)

82

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

Novo Invest 1 A/S

Denmark

100

Novo Invest 2A A/S

Denmark

100

Novo Invest 2E A/S

Denmark

100

Novo Maia, LP

USA

77

Novo Ventures (US), Inc.

USA

100

Novo Ventures 1 P/S

Denmark

100

Obis Medicines ApS

Denmark

98

Ritedose HoldCo A/S

Denmark

100

Rive Therapeutics, Inc.

USA

83

Sonion HoldCo A/S

Denmark

100

Xellia HoldCo A/S

Denmark

100

Allievex Corporation

USA

46

Antag Therapeutics ApS

Denmark

40

Asgard Therapeutics AB

Sweden

25

Bactolife ApS

Denmark

26

Biomason Inc.

USA

30

Biosyntia ApS

Denmark

34

Breye Therapeutics ApS

Denmark

50

Centauri Therapeutics Ltd.

UK

21

Chr. Hansen Holding A/S

Denmark

22

Chromologics ApS

Denmark

27

Commit Biologics ApS

Denmark

24

Convatec Group Plc.

UK

20

Draupnir Bio ApS, Denmark

Denmark

28

Engimmune Therapeutics AG

Switzerland

31

Evosep ApS

Denmark

20

F2G Limited

UK

25

Glentra Holding P/S

Denmark

20

Glentra GP ApS

Denmark

20

Glycomine, Inc.

USA

33

Hemab ApS

Denmark

33

Heparegenix GmbH

Germany

24

Hoba Therapeutics ApS

Denmark

36

Inspirna, Inc.

USA

23

Karus Therapeutics Ltd.

UK

25

Muna Therapeutics ApS

Denmark

20

NIP Norway Gardermoen Logistikkbygg Holding AS

Norway

27

Nuvig Therapeutics Inc.

USA

28

Orexo AB

Sweden

28

Revagenix, Inc.

USA

45

Renewable Energy Partnership P/S

Denmark

33

Life Science Investments and Capital Investments

(continues)

83

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

Renewable Energy Partnership 1 GP ApS

Denmark

33

STipe Therapeutics ApS

Denmark

29

Tarveda Therapeutics, Inc.

USA

37

The Protein Brewery BV

Netherlands

22

Tribune Therapeutics AB

Sweden

33

Urban Partners A/S

Denmark

25

Vestaron Corporation

USA

25

84

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

Inversago Pharma Inc.

Canada

100

Novo Nordisk Canada Inc.

Canada

100

Novo Nordisk Inc.

USA

100

Novo Nordisk North America Operations A/S

Denmark

100

Novo Nordisk Pharmaceutical Industries LP

USA

100

Novo Nordisk Pharmatech US, Inc.

USA

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma, Inc.

USA

100

Novo Nordisk Research Center Indianapolis, Inc.

USA

100

Novo Nordisk Research Center Seattle, Inc.

USA

100

Novo Nordisk US Bio Production, Inc.

USA

100

Novo Nordisk US Commercial Holdings, Inc.

USA

100

Novo Nordisk US Holdings Inc.

USA

100

Dicerna Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

USA

100

Emisphere Technologies, Inc.

USA

100

Forma Therapeutics, Inc.

USA

100

Novo Nordisk Pharmaceuticals A/S

Denmark

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma Operations A/S

Denmark

100

Novo Nordisk Region AAMEO and LATAM A/S

Denmark

100

Novo Nordisk Region Europe A/S

Denmark

100

Novo Nordisk Region Japan & Korea A/S

Denmark

100

Aldaph SpA

Algeria

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma GmbH

Austria

100

S.A. Novo Nordisk Pharma N.V.

Belgium

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma d.o.o.

Bosnia and Herzegovina

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma EAD

Bulgaria

100

Novo Nordisk Hrvatska d.o.o.

Croatia

100

Novo Nordisk s.r.o.

Czech Republic

100

Novo Nordisk Denmark A/S

Denmark

100

Novo Nordisk Pharmatech A/S

Denmark

100

Novo Nordisk Egypt LLC

Egypt

100

Novo Nordisk Egypt Pharmaceuticals Ltd.

Egypt

100

Novo Nordisk Estonia OÜ

Estonia

100

Novo Nordisk Farma OY

Finland

100

Biocorp Production S.A.

France

100

Novo Nordisk Group subsidiaries

North America Operations

Region International Operations

Region EMEA

(continues)

85

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

Novo Nordisk

France

100

Novo Nordisk Production SAS

France

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma GmbH

Germany

100

Novo Nordisk Hellas Epe.

Greece

100

Novo Nordisk Hungária Kft.

Hungary

100

Novo Nordisk Limited

Ireland

100

Novo Nordisk Ltd.

Israel

100

Novo Nordisk S.P.A.

Italy

100

Novo Nordisk Kazakhstan LLP

Kazakhstan

100

Novo Nordisk Kenya Ltd.

Kenya

100

Novo Nordisk Latvia SIA

Latvia

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma SARL

Lebanon

100

UAB Novo Nordisk Pharma

Lithuania

100

Novo Nordisk Farma dooel

North Macedonia

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma SAS

Morocco

100

Novo Nordisk B.V.

Netherlands

100

Novo Nordisk Finance (Netherlands) B.V.

Netherlands

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma Limited

Nigeria

100

Novo Nordisk Norway AS

Norway

100

Novo Nordisk Pharmaceutical Services Sp. z.o.o.

Poland

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma Sp.z.o.o.

Poland

100

Novo Nordisk Portugal Lda.

Portugal

100

Novo Nordisk Farma S.R.L.

Romania

100

Novo Nordisk Limited Liability Company

Russia

100

Novo Nordisk Production Support LLC

Russia

100

Novo Nordisk Saudi for Trading

Saudi Arabia

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma d.o.o. Belgrade (Serbia)

Serbia

100

Novo Nordisk Slovakia s.r.o.

Slovakia

100

Novo Nordisk d.o.o.

Slovenia

100

Novo Nordisk (Pty) Limited

South Africa

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma S.A.

Spain

100

Novo Nordisk Scandinavia AB

Sweden

100

Novo Nordisk Health Care AG

Switzerland

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma AG

Switzerland

100

Novo Nordisk Tunisie SARL

Tunisia

100

Novo Nordisk Saglik Ürünleri Tic. Ltd. Sti.

Turkey

100

Novo Nordisk Ukraine LLC

Ukraine

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma Gulf FZE

United Arab Emirates

100

Novo Nordisk Holding Limited

UK

100

Novo Nordisk Limited

UK

100

Novo Nordisk Research Centre Oxford Limited

UK

100
(continues)

86

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

Region China
Novo Nordisk (China) Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd.

China

100

Novo Nordisk (Shanghai) Pharma Trading Co. Ltd

China

100

Novo Nordisk Region China A/S

Denmark

100

Novo Nordisk Hong Kong Limited

Hong Kong

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma (Taiwan) Ltd.

Taiwan

100

Beijing Novo Nordisk Pharmaceuticals Science & Technology Co. Ltd

China

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma Argentina S.A.

Argentina

100

Novo Nordisk Pharmaceuticals Pty. Ltd.

Australia

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma (Private) Limited

Bangladesh

100

Novo Nordisk Produção Farmacêutica do Brasil Ltda.

Brazil

100

Novo Nordisk Farmacêutica do Brasil Ltda.

Brazil

100

Novo Nordisk Farmacéutica Limitada

Chile

100

Novo Nordisk Colombia SAS

Colombia

100

Novo Nordisk India Private Limited

India

100

Novo Nordisk Service Centre (India) Pvt. Ltd.

India

100

PT. Novo Nordisk Indonesia

Indonesia

100

Novo Nordisk Pars

Iran

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma Ltd.

Japan

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd

Malaysia

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma Operations Sdn Bhd

Malaysia

100

Novo Nordisk Mexico S.A. de C.V.

Mexico

100

Novo Nordisk Pharmaceuticals Ltd.

New Zealand

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma (Private) Limited

Pakistan

100

Novo Nordisk Panama S.A.

Panama

100

Novo Nordisk Peru S.A.C.

Peru

100

Novo Nordisk Pharmaceuticals (Philippines) Inc.

Philippines

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma (Singapore) Pte Ltd.

Singapore

100

Novo Nordisk India Holding Pte Ltd.

Singapore

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma Korea Ltd.

South Korea

100

Novo Nordisk Lanka (PVT) Ltd

Sri Lanka

100

Novo Nordisk Pharma (Thailand) Ltd.

Thailand

100

Novo Nordisk Vietnam Ltd.

Vietnam

100

NNE A/S

Denmark

100

NNIT A/S

Denmark

18

CS Solar Fund XIV LLC

USA

99

Region Rest of World

Other subsidiaries and associated companies

Companies without significant activities are not included in the list. NNE A/S subsidiaries are not included in the list.

87

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

Novozymes BioAg S.A.

Argentina

100

Novozymes Australia Pty. Ltd.

Australia

100

Novozymes Belgium BV

Belgium

100

Novozymes Latin America Ltda.

Brazil

100

Novozymes BioAg Productos Para Agricultura Ltda.

Brazil

100

Novozymes Group subsidiaries

Novozymes BioAg Limited

Canada

100

Novozymes Canada Limited

Canada

100

Nuocheng Trillion Food (Tianjin) Co., Ltd.

China

100

Novozymes (China) Biotechnology Co. Ltd.

China

100

Novozymes (China) Investment Co. Ltd.

China

100

Novozymes (Shenyang) Biologicals Co. Ltd.

China

100

Suzhou Hongda Enzyme Co. Ltd.

China

96

Novozymes OneHealth Biotechnology (Shanghai) Co. Ltd

China

100

Novozymes Bioindustrial A/S

Denmark

100

Novozymes Bioindustrial China A/S

Denmark

100

Novozymes Biopharma DK A/S

Denmark

100

Novozymes BioAg A/S

Denmark

100

Novozymes EG SSC

Egypt

100

Novozymes France S.A.S.

France

100

Novozymes Deutschland GmbH

Germany

100

Novozymes Berlin GmbH

Germany

100

Novozymes Greece Single Member SA

Greece

100

Novozymes Hong Kong Ltd.

Hong Kong

100

Novozymes South Asia Pvt. Ltd.

India

100

Riata Life Sciences Pvt. Ltd.

India

60

Synergia Life Sciences Pvt. Ltd.

India

60

PT Novozymes Indonesia Biotechnology

Indonesia

100

PrecisionBiotics Group Ltd.

Ireland

100

Novozymes Italia S.r.l.

Italy

100

Novozymes Japan Ltd.

Japan

100

Novozymes Kenya Ltd.

Kenya

100

Novozymes Malaysia Sdn. Bhd.

Malaysia

100

Novozymes Mexicana, S.A. de C.V.

Mexico

100

Novozymes Mexico, S.A. de C.V.

Mexico

100

Novozymes Nederland B.V.

Netherlands

100

Novozymes RUS LLC

Russia*

100

Novozymes Singapore Pte. Ltd.

Singapore

100

Novozymes South Africa (Pty) Ltd.

South Africa

100

Novozymes Korea Limited

South Korea

100

Novozymes Spain S.A.

Spain

100

Novozymes Switzerland AG

Switzerland

100
(continues)

88

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

Novozymes (Thailand) Ltd.

Thailand

100

Novozymes Enzim Dis Ticaret Ltd. Sirketi

Turkey

100

Novozymes UK Ltd.

UK

100

Novozymes BioAg, Inc.

USA

100

Novozymes Biologicals, Inc.

USA

100

Novozymes Blair, Inc.

USA

100

Novozymes, Inc.

USA

100

Physicians Exclusive LLC (d.b.a) Microbiome Labs

USA

100

Novozymes North America, Inc.

USA

100

Novozymes US, Inc.

USA

100

*Sales to Russia have been discontinued and the sales office in Russia has been closed.
Joint operations/associates
Grundejerforeningen Smørmosen

Denmark

Grundejerforeningen Hallas Park

Denmark

21st.BIO A/S

Denmark

40,6

Microbiogen PTY Ltd.

Australia

23,1

Tecnol s.r.l. in liqudiazione (formerly Beta Renewables S.p.A.)

Italy

9,95

MagnaBioAnalytics LLC

USA

19,35

NNIT Group subsidiaries
NNIT (Tianjin) Technology Co.Ltd

China

100

NNIT Digital & Life Sciences Philippines Inc

Phillippines

100

NNIT Switzerland AG

Switzerland

100

NNIT Germany GMBH

Germany

100

NNIT Inc.

USA

100

NNIT Czech Republic s.r.o.

Czech Republic

100

NNIT UK Ltd

UK

100

SCALES A/S

Denmark

100

NNIT Ireland Ltd.

Ireland

100

NNIT Poland Sp. Z.o.o.

Poland

100

NNIT Singapore Holdings Pte. Ltd.

Singapore

100

NNIT Singapore Pte. Ltd.

Singapore

100

Excellis Health Solutions LLC

USA

100

Excellis Europe Ltd.

UK

100

SL Controls Limited

Ireland

100

SL Controls USA Inc

USA

100

NNIT Italy S.r.l.

Italy

100

Prime4Services ESP S.L.

Spain

100

89

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

New Xellia Group A/S

Denmark

100

Otnortopco AS

Norway

100

Xellia Group AS

Norway

100

Xellia Pharmaceuticals AS

Norway

100

Xellia Pharmaceuticals AS Shanghai Rep. Office

Norway

100

Xellia Group ApS

Denmark

100

Xellia Pharmaceuticals ApS

Denmark

100

Xellia Pharmaceuticals ApS (Dubai Branch)

Denmark

100

Xellia Pharmaceuticals ApS (Panama Branch)

Denmark

100

Xellia Pharmaceuticals Ltd.

Hungary

100

Xellia Pharmaceuticals Inc.

USA

100

Nippon Axellia Co. Ltd.

Japan

100

Xellia Hong Kong Ltd.

Hong Kong

100

Xellia d.o.o.

Croatia

100

Xellia Pharmaceuticals Private Limited

India

100

Xellia Pharmaceuticals USA LLC

USA

100

Crane Pharmaceuticals LLC

USA

100

Xellia Pharmaceuticals Shanghai Co. Ltd.

China

100

Xellia (Taizhou) Pharmaceuticals Company Ltd.

China

51

Sonion InvestCo A/S

Denmark

100

Sonion Holding A/S

Denmark

100

Sonion A/S

Denmark

100

Sonion Nederland B.V

Nederlands

100

Sonion US, Inc.

USA

100

Sonion Polska S.P.zoo

Poland

100

Sonion Vietnam Ltd, Inc.

Vietnam

100

Sonion Vietnam II Ltd, Inc.

Vietnam

100

Sonion Philippines, Inc.

Phillippines

100

Xilco (CH) AG

Switzerland

100

Xellia Group subsidiaries

Sonion Group subsidiaries

90

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

Altasciences Group subsidiaries
Amalthea GP, LLC

USA

100

Amalthea Acquisition Holdings, LP

USA

90

Amalthea Acquisition I, LP

USA

100

Amalthea Acquisition II, LP

USA

100

Amalthea Parent Inc

USA

100

Altasciences Holdings Inc

USA

100

Altsciences US Acquisition Inc

USA

100

Altasciences Clinical Kansas Inc.

USA

100

Altascience Preclinical Seattle LLC

USA

100

Altasciences Clinical Los Angeles, Inc

USA

100

Calvert Laboratories Inc.

USA

100

Altasciences CDMO Phillidelphia, LLA

USA

100

Altasciences USA, LLC

USA

100

9360-1318 Quebec Inc

Canada

100

Altasciences Company Inc.

Canada

100

9186-5328 Quebec Inc

Canada

100

Altasciences Maintenance, LLC

USA

100

Altasciences Real Estate, LLC

USA

100

Altasciences Preclinical Columbia, LLC

USA

100

Altasciences Clinical Fargo, LLC

USA

100

Amalthea UK Ltd.

UK

100

Valley Biosystems

USA

100

Sinclair Bio Parent, LLC

USA

49

Pet Foods Solutions, LLC

USA

49

Sinclair Bio Resources, LLC

USA

49

UK

97

Baduhenna Holdco Ltd.

UK

100

Baduhenna BidCo Limited

UK

100

BioTeZ Berlin-Buch GmbH

Germany

100

Steffens Biotechnische Analysen GmbH

Germany

100

BBI Acquisition Limited

UK

100

Amalthea Acquisition Holdings, LP - subsidiaries

Associated companies

BBI Group subsidiaries
BBI Solutions Group Ltd.
BBI Solutions Group Ltd. – subsidiaries

(continues)

91

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

BBI Diagnostics Group Limited

UK

100

BBI Detection Limited

UK

100

BBI Resources Limited

UK

100

BBI Solutions OEM Limited

UK

100

BBI Detection LLC

USA

100

BBI Solutions LLC

USA

100

BBI Enzymes (USA) Limited

UK

100

BBI Enzymes SA (Pty) Limited

South Africa

100

Vision Biotech Proprietary Limited

South Africa

100

Novarum DX Limited

UK

100

BBI US Holding LLC

USA

100

BBI US Group LLC

USA

100

Maine Biotechnology Services Inc

USA

100

BBI Biotechnology (Shanghai) Co Limited

China

100

BBI Solutions GmbH

Germany

100

Diarect GmbH

Germany

100

BBI USD Limited

UK

100

BBI GBP Limited

UK

100

USA

89

USA

82

NH Kronos Parent, Inc.

USA

100

NH Kronos Intermediate I, Inc.

USA

100

NH Kronos Intermediate II, Inc.

USA

100

NH Kronos Intermediate III, Inc.

USA

100

NH Kronos Buyer, Inc.

USA

100

KabaFusion PPC Parent LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion Holdings LLC

USA

100

Pri-Med Infusion Services, Inc.

USA

100

EDCO Holding, Inc.

USA

100

IVEDCO, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion, LLC

USA

100

KabuFusion, Inc.

USA

100

Home Care Services, Inc.

USA

100

Medilink Homecare, Inc.

USA

100

Stellar Healthcare, Inc.

USA

100

At Home Infusion Services LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion Group subsidiaries
NH Kronos Ultimate Holdings, LP
NH Kronos Ultimate Holdings, LP - subsidiaries
NH Kronos Holdings, LP
NH Kronos Holdings, LP - subsidiaries

(continues)

92

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

Private Home Care Unlimited, Inc.

USA

100

KabaFusion of MI, LLC

USA

100

Complete Infusion Services, LLC

USA

100

OCT Pharmacy, L.L.C.

USA

100

KabaFusion IN, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion NY, LLC

USA

100

Lincare of New York, Inc.

USA

100

KabaFusion KY, LLC

USA

100

Gamma Acquisition Inc.

USA

100

KabaFusion AL, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion VA, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion AR, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion NC, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion WY, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion MD, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion NV, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion of Colorado, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion LA, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion ME, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion MN, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion OH, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion TN, LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion PPC Holdings LLC

USA

100

KabaFusion Inc. PA

USA

100

USA

77

USA

100

USA

100

USA

100

Maia Acqusition, LLC

USA

100

CSC MKG TopCo LLC

USA

100

CSC MKG InterCo LLC

USA

100

Medical Knowledge Group, LLC

USA

100

MKG Group subsidiaries
Novo Maia, LP
Novo Maia, LP - subsidiaries
Maia Aggregator LP
Maia Aggregator LP - subsidiaries
Maia Blocker Inc.
Maia Blocker Inc. - subsidiaries
Maia Acquisition Holdings LLC
Maia Acquisition Holdings LLC - subsidiaries

(continues)

93

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

MKG Philomena Buyer, Inc.

USA

100

MKG Philomena Opco, LLC

USA

100

Synapse Medical Communications, LLC

USA

100

CTLS, LLC

USA

100

Medical Events International, LLC

USA

100

81qd, LLC

USA

100

SciMed, LLC

USA

100

Helathlogix, LLC

USA

100

Rhea GP, LLC

USA

100

Novo Rhea Aggregator, LP

USA

63

USA

96

Rhea Intermediate, LP

USA

100

Rhea Intermediate II, Inc.

USA

100

Rhea Parent, Inc.

USA

100

The Ritedose Corporation

USA

100

TRC Propco, Inc.

USA

100

Ritedose Pharmaceuticals, LLC

USA

100

Ritedose (Wuhan) Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd.

China

100

Ritedose Group subsidiaries

Novo Rhea Aggregator, LP - subsidiaries
Rhea Acquisition Holdings, LP
Rhea Acquisition Holdings, LP – subsidiaries

Ellab Group subsidiaries
Echo TopCo A/S

Denmark

64

Denmark

100

Denmark

100

Denmark

100

Denmark

100

Echo TopCo A/S - subsidiaries
Echo BidCo A/S
Echo BidCo A/S - subsidiaries
Kelvin HoldCo A/S
Kelvin HoldCo A/S - subsidiaries
Kelvin BidCo A/S
Kelvin BidCo A/S - subsidiaries
Saballe TopCo ApS (in liquidation)

(continues)

94

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

Denmark

100

Ellab Inc.

USA

100

Ellab S.A.R.L

France

100

Ellab (UK) Ltd.

UK

100

Ellab Philippines Corp.

Philippines

100

Ellab Benelux B.V.

Netherlands

100

Ellab FZCO

Dubai

100

Ellab GmbH

Germany

100

Ellab Solutions Spain SLU

Spain

100

Ellab Monitoring Solutions Ltd.

UK

100

Ellab S.R.L

Italy

100

Ellab AG

Switzerland

100

Ellab Ireland Ltd.

Ireland

100

Ellab Singapore PTE. LTD.

Singapore

100

Ellab Austria GmbH

Austria

100

Integrated Commissioning & Qualification Consultants, LLC

USA

100

Evolution Scientific, Inc.

USA

100

PharmaSys, Inc.

USA

100

Complete Technical Solutions (CQV) Limited

UK

100

Arena Instrumentation Ltd.

UK

100

Autocal Ireland Limited

Ireland

100

CalX Instrumentation Services Limited

Ireland

100

Saballe TopCo ApS (in liquidation) - subsidiaries
Ellab A/S
Ellab A/S - subsidiaries

Ellab Inc. - subsidiaries

Ellab (UK) Ltd. - subsidiaries

Ellab Ireland Ltd. - subsidiaries

Dades Group subsidiaries
Dades Center/Box Holding ApS

Denmark

100

Dades Erhverv/Bolig Holding ApS

Denmark

100

Dades Center Vest ApS

Denmark

100

Dades Center Øst ApS

Denmark

100

Dades Box ApS

Denmark

100

Dades Erhverv ApS

Denmark

100

Dades Bolig ApS

Denmark

100

Waves ApS

Denmark

100

Fisketorvet 2 Odense ApS

Denmark

100

Rådhuspladsen ApS

Denmark

100
(continues)

95

Annual Report 2023

Company name

Country

Ownership(%)/votings rights

Køge Kyst I ApS

Denmark

100

Soeborg Ejendomme ApS

Denmark

100

Snedkerhaven Hvidovre ApS

Denmark

100

Bækkeskovvej ApS

Denmark

100

Slotengen Hillerød ApS

Denmark

100

Color 1 ApS

Denmark

100

Kulturporten Farum ApS

Denmark

100

Christiasvej Glostrup ApS

Denmark

100

Dades 4 ApS – Dades 10 ApS*

Denmark

100

Davista A/S

Denmark

49

Davista K/S

Denmark

49

* The companies are without any activity
Associated companies

96

Annual Report 2023

Annex A

Novo Nordisk Foundation Group Corporate
Social Responsibility
This appendix is the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group's reporting on corporate social responsibility, cf. section 99a and section 99b of the Danish Financial Statements Act. The statement first reviews the corporate social responsibility for the Novo Nordisk Foundation's grant-awarding activities and then
the corporate social responsibility for the Foundation Group's commercial activities. Finally, the diversity policy for the Novo Nordisk Foundation and
Novo Holdings A/S is reviewed.

(a part of management’s review)

Novo Nordisk Foundation
Risks related to societal responsibility
The main risks of the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group in relation to its
economic, social and environmental responsibility are connected to
the risks of the companies in the Group and include issues such as climate impact, diversity, human rights and anti-corruption. The economic, social and environmental risks of the Foundation’s funding activities are small and limited through observance of the Foundation’s
article of association and its various policies for acting responsibly and
maintaining a responsible role in society (see below). The Novo
Nordisk Foundation’s philanthropic activities will continue to have
Denmark as their centre of gravity, while we at the same time will increase our international reach and activity level, leveraging international collaboration opportunities to build scale and impact and catalyse changes that can benefit people and society globally. The Foundation’s corporate activities remain international in accordance with the
separate strategies of the companies in the Group.
Code of conduct, including anti-bribery & corruption and the whistleblower scheme
The Novo Nordisk Foundation (“the Foundation”) is determined to
maintain the highest standards of integrity and ethical behaviour
across its activities and maintains a zero-tolerance policy for bribery
and corruption in all forms.
The Foundation's Code of Conduct, adopted by the Foundation’s
Board of Directors in 2020, applies to all individuals affiliated with the

Foundation, including Novo Holdings A/S, members of the Board of
Directors and employees of the Foundation and Novo Holdings A/S,
all grant recipients and their employees fully or partially funded by the
Foundation, members of the Foundation's committees, as well as individuals, institutions and organisations that collaborate with the Foundation, Novo Holdings A/S, the BII Foundation and the LIFE Foundation. Read more at: https://novonordiskfonden.dk/en/who-weare/code-of-conduct/
The Foundation and Novo Holdings A/S maintain a confidential whistleblower channel, enabling anonymous reporting of Code of Conduct
violations. The whistleblower channel aims to bolster transparency
and accountability with regards to Foundation and partner behaviour.
Consequences of violations include a letter of reprimand, requiring a
grant to be repaid, or referral to law enforcement. Read more at:
https://novonordiskfonden.dk/en/whistleblower/
In 2023, the Foundation received nine reports via the whistleblower
channel, all of which were reviewed internally and via external legal
counsel. Furthermore, it created a dedicated compliance function this
year within the Legal Department. Based on risk assessment conducted by the legal department, current focus is on the Foundations
Code of Conduct, including due diligence processes, potential misuse
of grants, conflicts of interest, and personal data protection. The Foundation is also working closely with partners to address potential

97

Annual Report 2023

security risks related to its grant activity, including those linked to unauthorized transfer of knowledge and technology to foreign actors.
linked to unauthorized transfer of knowledge and technology to foreign actors.
Going forward we expect to continue working with and promoting our
Code of Conduct, anticorruption agenda and Whistleblower Scheme.
Economic and scientific responsibility
In 2023, the Foundation awarded DKK 9.1 billion in grants and philanthropic investments while its payouts amounted to DKK 5.8 billion.
The foundation's grant-awarding activities funded, in whole or in part,
the employment of around 9,600 people within scientific fields of education, research and innovation, mainly at universities, educational institutions and hospitals in Denmark and the Nordic countries. In addition, Foundation grants helped fund employees in social and humanitarian projects in Denmark and abroad. Grant-awarding activities and
payouts are described in more detail in The Novo Nordisk Foundation
Grant Report 2023: https://novonordiskfonden.dk//app/uploads/Novo-Nordisk-Foundation-2023-Annual-Grant-Report.pdf. Societal impacts are described in more details in the Novo Nordisk Foundation Impact Report 2023: https://novonordiskfonden.dk//app/uploads/Novo-Nordisk-Foundation-2023-Annual-Impact-Report.pdf
The Foundation supports free and independent research, primarily
within biomedicine, public health, biotechnology, engineering, computer and natural and technical sciences at public research institutions.
The institutions contribute to generations of new knowledge, inventions, education and innovation. The research results and any patents
belong to the researchers and the public universities and hospitals that
employ the researchers. No company in the Novo Nordisk Foundation
Group or other privately held companies has preferential access to the
research results funded by grants from the Foundation.
The Foundation measures and monitors the effects of its grant-giving
activities based on the grant recipients' systematic reporting. For the
year 2023 alone, the Foundation's grant recipients reported more than
30,000 activities, of which more than 4,100 were various scientific publications. 90% of publications are articles published in international
peer-reviewed scientific journals. Nearly three out of five of the journal
articles are published as collaborations between grant holders and international co-authors, over half take place in interdisciplinary collaborations, and every ninth journal article is published together with industry researchers. The proportion of grant recipients’ international
journal articles that are among the top 10% most cited worldwide was
23% in 2019-2022.
Overall, the Foundation’s contributions increase the volume of excellent research and training of researchers in Denmark. In addition, a significant contribution is made to the internationalisation of Danish and
Nordic research as well as to the researchers’ collaboration with researchers internationally and in the industry.

•

The NNF Dashboard: https://novonordiskfonden.dk/factsand-figures/

Social responsibility
The Foundation contributes to the creation and development of dynamic research environments at universities and hospitals. For society,
this means strengthening research-based education and increasing the
supply of talented university graduates, researchers and clinicians, and
attracting highly qualified researchers and graduates from outside
Denmark.
The Foundation has funded the establishment of Steno Diabetes Centers in each of the five Danish administrative regions as well as in
Greenland and Faroe Islands. Each centre makes an important contribution to research hospital activities in the field of diabetes, including
specialised services for diabetic patients within treatment, education,
and health promotion. On a quarterly basis the centres treated approximately 29,000 people with diabetes in 2023.
The Foundation wishes to support a sustainable societal development.
Sustainability includes climate and environmental issues as well as social, humanitarian and health considerations, including that employees
work in a healthy and safe working environment and that people as
well as animals are treated in the best possible way and in accordance
with current rules. The Novo Nordisk Foundation contributes to social,
humanitarian and health initiatives in Denmark by supporting a wide
range of activities, including initiatives that focus on education and
competence development for vulnerable citizens. The Foundation also
supports humanitarian efforts globally. The social and humanitarian
grant-giving amounted to DKK 0.4 billion in 2023, and the public health
and medical science grant-giving amounted to DKK 4.2 billion in 2023.
In 2023, as an example of the Foundation’s support for humanitarian
efforts globally, the Foundation agreed to strengthen the strategic partnership with World Diabetes Foundation (WDF) through the establishment of a seven-year Partnership Framework Agreement totalling DKK
289 million. The new agreement is based on the achievements under
the first five years of collaboration, and it has as the overall vision to accelerate Non Communicable Diseases prevention and care for vulnerable populations in Low- and Middle-Income Countries (LMICs).
During these first five years the WDF has reached more than 8000
health care professionals with training, enrolled more than 21,000 children in Type 1 diabetes care programmes and trained 117,000 children,
parents and teachers in healthy living and prevention.
In 2023, as an example of social efforts, the Foundation supported the
GAME project with DKK 3.4 million making the total granted amount
for the GAME project DKK 24 million. The initiative is a collaborative
effort between GAME, an international non-profit street organization,
and Health Promotion Research at Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen. Together the two organizations strive to address and mitigate the
prevalence of obesity and diabetes among vulnerable youth.

Read more at:
•

•

Grant Report 2023: https://novonordiskfonden.dk//app/uploads/Novo-Nordisk-Foundation-2023-Annual-Grant-Report.pdf.
2023 Annual Impact Report: https://novonordiskfonden.dk//app/uploads/Novo-Nordisk-Foundation-2023Annual-Impact-Report.pdf

In the strategy period 2023-2030, the long-term goal of the Foundation’s mission on health is to “Progress research and innovation in the
prevention and management of cardiometabolic and infectious diseases, regenerative medicine, and equitable health outcomes” and the
focus will be on the following four themes and ambitions:

Annual Report 2023

•

•

•

•

Theme 1. Preventing and managing cardiometabolic diseases
o
Ambition: Prevent and manage cardiometabolic
diseases through research-based action to reduce their global burden
Theme 2. Decreasing the burden and threat of infectious diseases
o
Ambition: Support research into prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of infectious diseases
Theme 3. Advancing and applying regenerative medicine
o
Ambition: Facilitate regenerative medicine solutions for disease treatment and research advancement
Theme 4. Reducing inequity in health
o
Ambition: Reduce inequities in health with a focus on people in vulnerable positions

Environmental responsibility
The Foundation helps to build and strengthen Denmark’s positions
within environmental sustainability. It recognizes that there is an urgent
need to tackle climate change and unsustainable food production. In
its 2030 strategy, the long-term goal of the sustainability mission is to
“Advance knowledge and solutions to support the green transition in
society”. In the strategy period, the Foundation focuses within its sustainability mission on the following four themes and ambitions to promote environmental sustainability::
•

•

•

•

Theme 1. Sustainable and high yield agriculture
o
Ambition: Advance research and innovation in agricultural production by understanding, controlling and utilising ecosystems
Theme 2. Sustainable food for healthy diets
o
Support the transformation of our food systems
towards improved planetary and human health
through research and translation within
sustainable production and consumption
Theme 3. High-impact climate change mitigation
technologies
o
Ambition: Eliminate greenhouse gas emissions
from high-carbon production and remove
atmospheric CO2 by supporting and driving
research for scalable climate change mitigation
technologies
Theme 4. Supporting society in the green transition:
o
Ambition: Build knowledge, networks and
systems to help support the green transition in
society.

In 2023, the Novo Nordisk Foundation in collaboration with Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation funded a new consortium of companies
and university that will utilise CO2 to produce proteins for human food.
This ambitious project addresses two of the biggest global challenges:
supplying nutritious food to a growing world population and mitigation
of climate change. The two Foundations are supporting the initiative
with up to DKK 200 million. The funding is part of the Novo Nordisk
Foundation’s work to advance the sustainability of society and the
planet, one of three focus areas in the Foundation’s 2030 strategy.
In 2023, the Novo Nordisk Foundation has awarded a total amount of
DKK 674 million for research grants in the field of biotechnical science.

98

In 2023, the consumption of energy (3,000 GJ) and water (1,000 M3)
remained unchanged compared to 2022. As in 2022 100% of the energy consumption in 2023 came from renewable energy. The amount
of waste increased by from 30 to 50 tonnes compared to 2022 due to
an 25% increase in the number of employees. 99% of the total waste
was recycled.
2022 was the first ever year that the Foundation did a comprehensive
analysis of emissions from own operations (Scope 1+2). The analysis
was repeated in 2023 and showed that the GHG emissions in Scope 1 +
2 were 80 tonnes, which was a decrease of 28 % compared to 110 tons
in 2022. For scope 3 emissions the total in 2023 were reduced by 1%
compared to the 4,690 tons in 2022. The majority of the Scope 3 emissions come from purchase of goods and services (43%), business
travel (54%) and employee commuting (2%).
Table A and B in this annex shows figures for the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group's social and environmental footprint.
The Novo Nordisk Foundation as a workplace
As a workplace, the Novo Nordisk Foundation is rooted in a strong
purpose-driven culture with employees dedicated to the mission to
improve people’s health and sustainability of society and the planet.
The Foundation emphasises diversity among its staff, cf. the section on
the Foundation’s diversity policy: https://novonordiskfonden.dk/en/diversitetspolitik/

99

Annual Report 2023

The commercial activities of the Foundation
The following description of Corporate Social Responsibility at group
level applies to all the companies in the Novo Nordisk Foundation
Group. The Foundation’s Board of Directors has adopted a common
set of values, “Charter for companies in the Novo Group”, which all
companies in the Novo Group must demonstrate a willingness, ability
and resolve to fulfil.
•
•
•
•

Company products and services make a significant difference in improving the way people live and work.
The company is perceived to be an innovator – in technology, in products, in services and/or in market approach.
The company is among the best in its business and a challenging place to work.
The company delivers competitive financial performance.

Companies in the Novo Group commit to:
•
•
•

•

Value-based management
Open and honest dialogue with its stakeholders
Continuous improvement of
o
financial performance
o
environmental performance
o
social performance
Reporting in accordance with relevant, internationally approved conventions.

Based on the charter, the companies in the Novo Group have formulated their own policies for social responsibility and publish independent reports of their work with these, e.g., policies for economic, environmental and social responsibility (including anti-corruption), compliance with conventions (e.g., human rights), value-based management
and open and honest dialogue with its stakeholders. On the basis of
the charter, Novo Holdings A/S has defined its own values, which are
the basis for the company’s investments in and collaborations with
other companies. The values can be found at www.novoholdings.dk
Risks in relation to societal responsibility
The main risks of the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group in relation to
economic, social, and environmental responsibility are related to the
risks of the companies in the Group. The risks are minimised through
the Charter for the companies in the Group as well as the companies’
own policies for responsibility, as described in the companies’ independent corporate social responsibility reports. Read more about the
Novo Nordisk Foundation’s role as a committed owner here:
https://novonordiskfonden.dk/en/about-the-foundation/ownership/
The companies’ main risks are particularly linked to the international
development in the financial and economic markets, including exchange rate uncertainty, uncertainty in international trade policy and
thus the development in the global sales markets, uncertainty with
share and bond prices, etc. Companies seek to address these risks

2

Companies in which Novo Holdings A/S has a controlling interest either report on
their social and environmental responsibility in accordance with the Danish Financial
Statements Act or refer to the Novo Nordisk Foundation’s annual report.

through portfolio diversification in the areas of investment, trading and
financial transactions, price hedging and investments in innovation and
research and development.
Novo Holdings A/S includes information about its policies in relation to
responsible investments in the company’s annual report. Novo
Nordisk A/S includes information about the company’s social and environmental responsibility in its annual report, while Novozymes A/S
publishes a supplement to its annual report. The three annual reports
are available at: : https://assets.novoholdings.dk/novo-holdings-2023annual-report.pdf, https://www.novonordisk.com/investors/annualreport.html and https://investors.novozymes.com/investors/financialreports/annual-reports/default.aspx 2.
Anti-corruption
Novo Holdings A/S
Novo Holdings A/S’s management approach to handling anti-corruption and business integrity is an integral part of the company’s guiding
principles and values, which are based on Novo Holdings A/S’ mission.
Novo Holdings A/S strives to be a respected company and is subject
to the Foundation’s Code-of-Conduct and Whistleblower scheme.
Novo Nordisk A/S
Novo Nordisk A/S keeps a close eye on compliance with all applicable
local and international anti-corruption laws, regulations and standards,
such as the US Foreign Corruption Practices Act and the UK Bribery
Act. These requirements are spelled out in the company’s Business
Ethics Compliance Framework. Any suspected breaches of the company’s standards can be reported anonymously by employees and external parties through the Compliance Hotline. Breaches are investigated and, if substantiated, action is taken immediately.
Novozymes A/S
Novozymes A/S’ management approach to addressing anti-corruption
and business integrity is embedded in the company’s corporate values
and policies. Novozymes A/S has a dedicated compliance function
handling business integrity-related matters, including training of employees. Moreover, Novozymes A/S works proactively to prevent, detect and respond to fraud. An internal control system enables the identification of fraud cases and concerns raised, either through Novozymes’ whistleblower scheme or other reporting channels.
Economic and scientific responsibility
Novo Holdings A/S
In 2023, the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group paid DKK 16.8 billion in
corporation tax in Denmark, of which Novo Nordisk A/S accounted for
by far the largest share. A large part of the Foundation’s income via
Novo Holdings A/S are dividends from Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes A/S, which primarily earn their profits outside Denmark. By end
of 2023, Novo Holdings A/S had 179 employees.

100

Annual Report 2023

Novo Holdings A/S’ other investments in life-science and biotech companies result in thousands of jobs worldwide. The Novo Group and the
life-science portfolio employed 134,000 in 2023, an 25% increase compared to 2020, where 107,000 were employed.
Novo Nordisk A/S
Novo Nordisk A/S had sales of DKK 232 billion in 2023, North America
accounted for 59%, Europe, the Middle East and Africa for 22%, China
for 7% and the rest of the world for 12% of total revenue. For Novo
Nordisk A/S, less than one percent of the revenue is realized in Denmark. In 2023, Novo Nordisk A/S had 64,319 employees worldwide.
The number of employees increased in most areas with the highest
growth in Product Supply, Quality & IT. The employee turnover rate
decreased from 8.2% in 2022 to 5.5% in 2023. The company investment in research and development increased to DKK 32 billion reflecting increased late-stage clinical trial activity and increased early research activities compared to 2022. The acquisition of Forma Therapeutics Inc. in 2022 and Inversago Pharma also increased R&D spending.
In the European Commission’s 2023 overview (https://iri.jrc.ec.europa.eu/scoreboard/2023-eu-industrial-rd-investment-scoreboard)
on the world’s 2,500 largest companies’ investments in R&D, Novo
Nordisk A/S ranks as number 15 in Europe and as number 65 globally.
Novozymes A/S
Novozymes A/S’ turnover in 2023 was DKK 17,899 million. 65% from
activities outside Europe, the Middle East and Africa, of which the
United States alone accounts for 32%. Novozymes A/S realized 98.7%
of revenue outside Denmark. The company has 6,756 employees. In
2023, Novozymes A/S invested DKK 2,017 million in R&D, or 11.3 % of
the revenue, in R&D. Novozymes A/S is ranked as number 145 in Europe and 769 globally on R&D investments.
Social Responsibility
Novo Holdings A/S
Novo Holdings A/S has a Responsible Investment Process which is anchored in the Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) policies.
The aim is to integrate Environmental, Social and Governance considerations as well as societal impact into the investment strategy, investment processes and engaged ownership activities to provide better investment decisions and returns. Prior to an investment, Novo Holdings
A/S examines among other things whether the entity’s actions are
compliant with the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group’s charter. If it is a
direct investment, it is Novo Holdings A/S’ responsibility to ensure that
the entity does not act irresponsibly at the social or environmental
level. If an investment is made through a third party, it is also Novo
Holdings A/S’ task to ensure that the third party is not socially or environmentally irresponsible in its actions. Each investment undergoes
this process, and if it is deemed that a company or third party does not
meet the criteria, the investment is rejected. As Novo Holdings A/S
wishes to act as an active and responsible shareholder, through employees Novo Holdings A/S are represented on the boards of Novo
Nordisk A/S, Novozymes A/S, and with a few exceptions in all other
portfolio companies.

Novo Nordisk A/S
Novo Nordisk A/S Articles of Association state that the company will
"strive to conduct its activities in a financially, environmentally, and socially responsible way," framing Novo Nordisk A/S’ long-term strategy
of being a sustainable business.
Novo Nordisk A/S’ global code of conduct sets out the fundamental
principles and required behaviours for its employees and collaborators and is rooted firmly in the Novo Nordisk Way Essentials. The Novo
Nordisk Way Essentials are a foundational set of ten guiding principles
that shape and inform everything the company does, including balancing financial, environmental and social performance.
The combination of foundation ownership and stock listing enables
Novo Nordisk A/S to embark on long-term sustainable strategies while
maintaining short-term transparency on performance. The company’s
foundation ownership supports the overarching imperative to be both
commercially successful and responsive to the wider needs of society.
Novo Nordisk A/S supports the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals.
The company has been an active participant to the UN Global Compact since 2002 and submits the ‘Communication on Progress’ focusing on governance, human rights, labour, environment and anti-corruption on an annual basis.
The Novo Nordisk Way, the company’s Business Code of Ethics “OneCode” and international and local standards for responsible business
conduct set the foundation for ethics and compliance in Novo Nordisk
A/S. This covers anti-fraud, anti-bribery, anti-off-label promotion,
transparency in dealing with healthcare professionals and organisations, protection of personal data and respect to human rights.
Ethics and compliance training is conducted on an annual basis and
mandatory for all employees, including all new hires. Business ethics
reviews are performed by Group Internal Audit (GIA) in subsidiaries,
production sites, vendors and headquarters. Supplier audits concluded by Novo Nordisk's Corporate Quality function consist of responsible sourcing audits and quality audits conducted at suppliers. A
compliance hotline enables employees, stakeholders and external parties to report potential violations of the company’s policies or applicable laws and regulations.
Novozymes A/S
Novozymes A/S works with transparency and responsibility across all
its business activities, and proactively shares information with stakeholders via various platforms and information channels, e.g., by reporting annually on its progress toward implementing the UN Global Compact’s Ten Principles in the company’s Communication on Progress report.
Novozymes is recognized for its sustainability leadership and performance by many leading rating agencies, including CDP, MSCI, Sustainalytics, Ecovadis and more. In 2023, Novozymes was recognized in
CDP’s Climate Change A List (leadership ranking) for their commitment
to environmental transparency and action on climate change.
Novozymes are committed to high standards and ambitious actions to
improve their climate footprint across scopes 1, 2 and 3 with the aim of
reaching net-zero by 2050. Novozymes was among the first companies

101

Annual Report 2023

in the world to receive validation of its net-zero targets by SBTi. Novozymes commit to reach net-zero GHG emissions across the value chain
by 2050 from a 2018 base year. To do so Novozymes strives to decouple environmental impact from business growth, and they define targets and metrics that measure and drive their sustainability performance.
Read more about Novozymes’ approach to sustainability at:
https://www.novozymes.com/en/about-us/positions-policies.
Health responsibility
Novo Nordisk A/S
Novo Nordisk A/S' purpose is to drive change to defeat serious chronic
diseases. In 2023, Novo Nordisk A/S delivered medical treatment to
more than 40.5 million diabetic patients worldwide, a 12% increase
compared to 36.3 million patients 2022. The 12% increase was primarily driven by the GLP-1 franchise, followed by the new-generation insulin and human insulin franchises.
Through the Access to Insulin Commitment programme, Novo
Nordisk A/S guarantees supply of low-priced human insulin to the
least developed countries and other low-income countries as well as
to organisations providing relief in humanitarian settings. The programme guarantees a ceiling price of USD 3 per vial in 77 low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs) around the world. Over the past
year, Novo Nordisk A/S reached 6.7 million people living with diabetes
globally with its insulin medicines through access and affordability initiatives. The company extended support to more than 52,000 children
with type 1 diabetes through the Changing Diabetes® in Children
(CDiC) programme. In the US, the company provided access to affordable insulin for 1.4 million people and supported a further 2.8 million
with initiatives relating to its GLP-1-based therapies.
In 2023, the estimated number of patients with diabetes reached with
Novo Nordisk A/S' human insulin vials through the Access to Insulin
Commitment was 2.4 million, compared to 1.8 million in 2022. Novo
Nordisk A/S also sold human insulin vials below the ceiling price of
USD 3 in countries outside the commitment, reaching an estimated additional 2.6 million patients in 2023. This equates to a total of 5 million
patients with diabetes reached with human insulin in vials below USD
3 per vial globally.
Through the Changing Diabetes® in Children programme, Novo
Nordisk A/S reached 52,249 children with type 1 diabetes in 29 low-resource countries in 2023, compared to 41,033 in 2022. Almost half of
the newly enrolled children were reached through expansion in Asian
countries, mainly India, Pakistan, Indonesia, and Vietnam. The children
received access to diabetes care in clinics (e.g., patient education) as
well as medical supplies if needed.
Novo Nordisk’s childhood obesity partnership with UNICEF, launched
in 2019 and expanded in 2023, aims to reach 10 million children across
the globe. The partnerships focus on risk factors driving the obesity epidemic through policies, programmes and practices that directly impact the nutrition, wellbeing and development of children. Since its
launch, the partnership has positively impacted the lives of more than
2.7 million children and caregivers across Latin America and the Caribbean. The expanded partnership will bring a proven approach to new
geographies with an increased focus on driving policy change at national level and action at city level. Through local engagement and

cross-sector collaboration, Novo Nordisk and UNICEF are focusing on
interventions with demonstrable track records.
The world’s vulnerable population groups are in focus in Novo Nordisk
A/S’ humanitarian programme. Through the Partnering for Change
programme with the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
Danish Red Cross and other organisations, the company aims to ensure treatment for people with diabetes and other serious chronic diseases in humanitarian crises.
In 2023, Novo Nordisk A/S donated DKK 119 million to humanitarian
and social causes via the World Diabetes Foundation (WDF). WDF is an
independent fund established by Novo Nordisk A/S in 2002 with the
aim of promoting diabetes prevention and treatment in developing
countries. WDF provides assistance to sustainable partnerships and
acts as a catalyst to help others do more. Read more at www.worlddiabetesfoundation.org
Novo Nordisk A/S provides financial support to improve global access
to haemophilia treatment. In 2023, the company donated DKK 19 million to the Novo Nordisk Haemophilia Foundation, established in
2005. Read more at www.nnhf.org
Novozymes A/S
As a UN Global Compact LEAD member, Novozymes A/S is strongly
involved in several UN-led initiatives as well as in local UNGC networks in Brazil, China, Denmark, India and the USA. At the UN General
Assembly in New York in September 2015, Novozymes A/S joined the
rest of the world in welcoming the 17 UN Sustainable Development
Goals (World Goals for Sustainable Development). By 2030, countries
and multinationals are expected to use these goals to implement policies, allocate funding and drive change that will help build a fair and
more sustainable world for all.
Novozymes A/S was among the first to adapt its strategy to the Sustainable Development Goals by applying cutting-edge biotechnological solutions that have the potential to address some of the global challenges. For Novozymes A/S, the goals are a frame of reference for guiding decisions, managing risks, and securing future business opportunities. More information about how Novozymes A/S delivers on the Sustainable Development Goals can be found in the company’s CSR reporting, which can be downloaded at: https://investors.novozymes.com/investors/financial-reports/annual-reports/default.aspx
Environmental and climate responsibility
Resource utilisation
Novo Holdings A/S
In 2023, the consumption of energy decreased by 1 MGJ and water
consumption remained unchanged compared to 2022 were a total of
1.000 m3. As in 2022 100% of the energy consumption in 2023 came
from renewable energy. The amount of waste increased by from 30 to
50 tonnes compared to 2022 due to increase in the number of employees and the opening of new international offices. 99% of the total
waste was recycled.

102

Annual Report 2023

Novo Nordisk A/S

Climate

Novo Nordisk A/S has a target of reaching net-zero emissions by 2045.
More near term, the company has pledged to reach zero emissions
from its operations and transportation by 2030.

Novo Holdings A/S

Novo Nordisk A/S’ Scope 1 and 2 CO2e 3 emissions remained broadly
unchanged from 2022 due to energy savings projects and renewable
power initiatives. Scope 3 emissions increased by 55% due to substantial investments in production capacity and increase in supply chain activities to support company growth.
In 2023, production sites consumed 4,150 thousand m3 of water, an increase of 6% compared to 2022 due to higher production volumes
and ramp-up activities within production sites. Novo Nordisk continues to focus on ways to be more energy efficient, and energy-saving
projects implemented in 2023 within production sites resulted in annual savings of 64,000 GJ. 100% of the electricity consumption at production plants came from renewable sources such as biomass, wind,
and hydropower. These efforts could not fully mitigate the increased
production volumes, ramp-up activities and impact from adverse local
weather conditions, and consequently energy consumption for production increased by 4%.
Reducing water consumption continues to be a focus area for production sites around the world - especially in areas of water scarcity or
high seasonal variations, like in France, Brazil, China, US, Iran and Algeria. Through implementation of water conservation projects in waterstressed areas a savings of 14 thousand cubic metres of water was
achieved in 2023.
The amount of waste decreased by 11% compared to 2022 due to
waste reduction initiatives, reuse of waste and implementation of zero
landfill waste strategies. 78% of the total waste was either recycled,
used for biogas production, or incinerated at plants where energy is
used for heat and power production.
Novozymes A/S
With increasing pressure on global resources, Novozymes A/S is focused on optimizing operations from year to year in order to reduce
the consumption of natural resources and reduce the negative environmental consequences of production. Long-term efficiency targets
for energy, CO2 and water have been set to optimize production processes, thereby reducing the consumption of limited resources and reducing costs.
Novozymes strives to decouple environmental impact from business
growth. In 2023, the consumption of energy and water decreased by
9% and 11% respectively compared to 2022. The decrease was driven
by changes in product mix towards less resource consuming products,
lower production volumes and implementation of efficiency-enhancing projects. 51% of energy consumption in 2023 came from renewable energy - an improvement compared to 50% in 2022.

3

Starting 2023, Novo Nordisk has started reporting in CO2e, expanding scope of reporting to include all green-house gases. While historic emission related data is still

2022 was the first ever year that Novo Holdings did a comprehensive
analysis of emissions from own operations (Scope 1+2). The analysis
was repeated in 2023 and showed that the GHG emissions in Scope 1 +
2 were 250 tonnes, which was an increase of 25 % compared to 200
tons in 2022. In 2023 the scope 3 emissions excluding the downstream
investments were reduced by 17% compared to 2022. The majority of
the Scope 3 emissions are downstream investments (97%). Purchase
of goods and services, business travel and employee commuting account for the remaining (3%).
Novo Nordisk A/S
In 2018, Novo Nordisk A/S committed itself to a set of long-term environmental targets for the share of energy derived from renewable energy sources as well as its energy consumption and water consumption. The overall goal is net zero emissions across the company’s entire
value chain by 2045 and along the way to achieve zero CO2e emissions
from all operations and transport by 2030.
Novo Nordisk A/S has made significant progress in curbing the company’s emissions. Since 2020, all of the company’s production sites
have sourced 100% renewable power and the company aims to reach
zero CO2e emissions from operations and transportation by 2030.
However, focusing solely on its own activities is not enough. Novo
Nordisk A/S must also ensure its 60,000-plus suppliers play their part
in this transformation, since their activities account for the majority of
the company’s total CO2e emissions – amounting to 98% in 2023.
Novo Nordisk’s target is that all goods and services from suppliers will
be based on 100% sourced renewable power by 2030. The company
is engaging with suppliers in high-impact areas to understand how
they can collectively reduce emissions using novel approaches to decarbonisation. This involves working on innovative Power-to-X solutions that use renewable electricity to produce green fuels and lowcarbon chemicals or using organic waste materials to produce biofuels.
Recent examples include Novo Nordisk’s membership in the Sustainable Aviation Buyers Alliance (SABA) to support the expansion of sustainable aviation fuel facilities, and the company’s partnership with
global logistics firm Maersk on low-emission fuels for ocean freight.
Both investments are contributing to the global uptake of innovative
green technologies.
Novo Nordisk A/S’ emissions from production-related Scope 1 and 2
CO2e emissions increased by 19% in 2023 compared to 2022, due to
increase in scope of reporting to also include CO2e from cooling
agents, starting 2023.
Novo Nordisk A/S reduced its CO2e emissions from operations and
transportation by 8% in 2023 versus 2022 through energy-saving projects, renewable power initiatives and procurement of sustainable aviation fuel.

in CO2, the change impacts 2023 emission reporting as well as all emission related
targets which have now been shifted to CO2e.

103

Annual Report 2023

Read more about Novo Nordisk's environmental results in the Annual
Report: https://www.novonordisk.com/annual-report.html

promotion gender gap analysis that showed that all promotions and
performance payout were equally distributed across genders, and we
do not see any pay gap disparity between male and female employees.

Novozymes A/S
Novo Holdings A/S
Sustainability plays a central role in the strategy of Novozymes A/S.
Many of Novozymes A/S’ biological solutions enable the company’s
customers to reduce their environmental footprint compared to the
use of conventional technologies. The solutions create higher quality
products with lower costs and allow customers to reduce their CO2
emissions. For more than 10 years, Novozymes A/S has used life cycle
assessments (LCA) to document the environmental consequences of
the company’s biological solutions. The LCA studies are usually completed in collaboration with customers and based on data from customers’ specific applications of Novozymes’ technology.
As part of the journey towards becoming a net-zero emission company
in 2050, Novozymes aim to achieve a 75% reduction in scopes 1 and 2
GHG emissions from Novozymes’ own operations, and a 35% reduction in scope 3 emissions from the full supply chain, all from a 2018
baseline. Novozymes' GHG emissions from own operations (Scope
1+2) in 2023 were 143,000 tonnes, which was a decrease of 12 % compared to 161,000 tons in 2022. For scope 3 emissions the total in 2023
were reduced by 12% compared to 2022. In 2023, Novozymes has
achieved a 67% reduction of GHG emissions in own operations (scope
1+2) from a 2018 baseline.

At Novo Holdings A/S, maintaining a high level of engagement among
employees is a key priority. Given the continuous growth, both in
terms of additional employees and geographical expansion, it is crucial
that Novo Holdings remains an inspiring and attractive workplace.
Novo Holdings has grown by 15% in 2023 with an internal workforce
on now 179 employees. However, our voluntary turnover remains low
on only 5%.
In April 2023, Novo Holdings A/S carried out a survey focused on employee engagement survey, in which 96% of the employees participated. The results were very positive, with a satisfaction score of 94,
especially within the categories: Company Culture, Pride in Company,
Trust & Respect and Diversity & Inclusion. Novo Holdings A/S will continue to strive to be an excellent workplace, always aiming to achieve
our purpose and live out the Novo Holdings Way of Performance, Respect and Responsibility.
Novo Nordisk A/S

By 2025, Novozymes will exclusively buy electricity from renewable
sources. On the way towards that goal, 84% of the company’s total
electricity consumption in 2023 was derived from renewable sources.

The 2023 employee engagement survey “Evolve” revealed an increase
in the already high overall engagement, bringing it to 86% favourable
compared to 85% favourable in 2022. Novo Nordisk A/S continues to
score in the top decile against external organisations when it comes to
providing a purpose-driven workplace.

The Novo Group as a workplace
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Group puts emphasis on offering a
committed and professional workplace where the employees thrive,
are challenged and have opportunities to develop their potential. It involves an inclusive culture with respect for the individual, continuous
development, health and safety. And further, development of leadership, people and organisation. This agenda is centred around leadership, people growth, and building an even stronger collaborative and
inclusive culture with seamless, digital, and efficient processes.

In 2022, Novo Nordisk A/S launched an aspirational target of achieving
a balanced gender representation across all managerial levels with a
minimum of 45% for both women and men in senior leadership positions by the end of 2025. By the end of 2023, 54% of all leadership positions are held by men and 46% are held by women. Across senior
leadership positions, the gender split is 59% men and 41% women.
There is still work to be done but Novo Nordisk A/S are making significant progress. At the end of 2023, 41% of senior leadership positions
were filled by women, compared to 39% one year earlier.

Novo Nordisk Foundation

Novozymes A/S

In the Novo Nordisk Foundation, a high level of engagement among
employees is vital. The Foundation is continuously growing, both in
terms of new employees and activities in our programme areas. The
number of employees of the Foundation has grown by 25% in 2023
with an internal workforce on 202 employees by the end of the year.
Our voluntary turnover remains low on 6%. To support the development goals of the Foundation, it is crucial that the organisation continuously strive to be an inspiring and attractive workplace with highly engaged employees.

Novozymes focus on employee development throughout the organization. The focus is supported and driven by management, as a key element in relation to improving employee satisfaction and motivation.
The annual engagement survey showed a thrive score of 84, which is
three points higher than the industry benchmark. Novozymes is especially proud of this achievement during what was a year of change due
to the planned merger with Chr. Hansen. Such a significant event can
naturally be a cause of uncertainty for people.

The engagement survey, that we run each year, continues to show high
engagement amongst our employees with 91% engagement and a
98% respondent rate, above global benchmark. The categories around
purpose and inclusion were specifically scored high this year and wellbeing has improved significantly.
The Novo Nordisk Foundation wishes to promote gender equality in
across all people processes and in 2023 we conducted a salary and

Novozymes’ proactive attitude to avoid discrimination and promote
equal opportunities is reflected in specific goals for managers and
across all professionals in relation to gender. By 2030, Novozymes aim
to achieve gender balance by striving for a minimum of 45% women
and 45% men across all professionals and in senior management.
There is still work to be done but Novozymes A/S are progressing towards its goals. And the end of 2023, 36% of senior management positions were filled by women, compared to 33% one year earlier. In

Annual Report 2023

addition, gender balance across all professionals remained at 43%
women and 57% men, as in 2022.

Diversity policy in the Novo Nordisk Foundation
Group
Section 99b of the Danish Financial Statements Act requires that Danish companies of a certain size report on diversity.
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Group welcomes and promotes diversity among its staff, managements and boards, as diversity in relation to
gender, age, education, cultural background and international experience helps to ensure a broad range of skills, which in turn contributes
to development, renewal, and quality in work efforts. Furthermore, it
lays the foundation for an inclusive culture with respect for individuals,
ongoing personal development, health and safety. Diversity is promoted through the recruitment and development processes in the
Group.
In 2023, the Board of Directors of the Foundation approved a new version of the 2019 diversity policy for the Novo Nordisk Foundation and
Novo Holdings A/S. The Foundation Group’s two commercial companies have formulated their own diversity policies in line with the Foundation’s policy.
Novo Nordisk Foundation diversity and inclusion policy is available at:
Diversity-Policy_December-2023.pdf (novonordiskfonden.dk)
Novo Nordisk A/S: www.novonordisk.com/sustainable-business/esgportal/principles-positions-and-policies/diversity-inclusion-policy.html.
Novozymes A/S: https://www.novozymes.com/en/about-us/positions-policies
Diversity policy for the Novo Nordisk Foundation and Novo Holdings
A/S
The diversity policy reflects the core values of the Novo Nordisk Foundation and Novo Holdings A/S. The policy sets the goals, defines the
scope and provides guiding principles for the work with diversity. The
Novo Nordisk Foundation and Novo Holdings A/S follow international
standards and procedures and in some case take a lead. The diversity
policy is an important part of the decision-making process related to
recruitments, to ensure diversity across all departments. In 2023, the
joint Personnel and Organisation department between the Novo
Nordisk Foundation and Novo Holdings A/S were split into two departments with one for each entity. The Foundation’s Impact department provides diversity analyses on recruitments and on the grant-giving and commercial activities, including their measured effects. The
Novo Nordisk Foundation collaborates with the Danish universities to
promote diversity, for example in relation to employees fully or partly
funded by the Foundation’s grants.
The foundation continuously strives to be an attractive and flexible
workplace where all employees can grow, develop, and realise their
professional potential in a collaborative and inclusive manner. Our existing workforce represents a rich diversity of educational backgrounds, industry- and sector experiences and differences in nationalities, genders, and ages. This ensures that a variety of perspectives is
brought to the table, which is key for future success of the foundation.

104

During 2023, Novo Nordisk Foundation launched an aspirational target
of achieving a balanced gender representation across all managerial
levels with a minimum of 40% of the underrepresented gender across
our Board and our Executive Leadership Team by the end of 2027.
https://novonordiskfonden.dk/en/diversity-policy/
By the end of 2023, our gender distribution amongst the Foundation’s
employees is considered gender balanced with 60% females and 40%.
Our leaders directly referring to C-level (CEO) consist of 37 % female
leaders and 63% males, which means that we at this level already now
live up to our target. The gender distribution in our Board of Directors
is currently at 29% females and 71% male. The composition of the
Board of Directors met the gender diversity requirements set out in
Danish legislation.
Efforts are being made continuously to be able attract more female talent. Based on the guiding precipice in the diversity policy adopted by
the Board of Directors of the Novo Nordisk Foundation, the Foundation will in 2024 continue the work that supports the development towards more diversity.
Beyond gender diversity we value and monitor diversity in teams
more broadly. When we look at our age and nationality distribution, we
have 23 % of colleagues coming from other countries than Denmark
and a great representation across four generations.

105

Annual Report 2023

Table A. Gender diversity in the Novo Nordisk Foundation
2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

6

6

6

6

7

33%

33%

33%

33%

29%

Target (2027)

Board of Directors
Total number of individuals
Underrepresented gender (pct)

40%

Top management*
Total number of individuals

1

1

1

1

1

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

15

15

17

17

19

40%

40%

29%

29%

37%

Total number of individuals

159

187

131

167

202

Underrepresented gender (pct)

55%

55%

59%

60%

60%

Underrepresented gender (pct)

40%

Management levels**
Total number of individuals
Underrepresented gender (pct)

40%

All employees
NA

*) Top management (CEO), **) Management levels are (C-level and all managers referring to the C-level)
Diversity in Novo Holdings A/S
During 2023, Novo Holdings A/S launched an aspirational target of
achieving a balanced gender representation across all managerial levels with a minimum of 40% of the underrepresented gender across the
Board and Executive Leadership Team by the end of 2025.
By the end of 2023, the gender distribution amongst Novo Holdings’
employees is considered gender balanced with 40% females and 60%
male. Our leaders directly referring to C-level consist of 33 % female
leaders and 67% males. The gender distribution in Novo Holdings’
Board of Directors is currently at 33% females and 67% male. Efforts
are being made continuously to be able attract more female talent.
Based on the guiding precipice in the diversity policy adopted by the
Board of Directors of the Novo Nordisk Foundation, Novo Holdings
A/S will in 2024 continue the work that supports the development towards more diversity.

data in an ethical way. The rules describe how the Novo Nordisk Foundation must use and process both personal data and non-identifiable
(e.g., anonymised, aggregated, non-personal) data as well as data and
information that applicants submit when applying for a grant using the
Foundation’s application system. Read more at: https://novonordiskfonden.dk//app/uploads/Novo-Nordisk-Foundation-2023-AnnualGrant-Report.pdf.
Novo Holdings A/S
To cope with the challenges that arise from the fast-moving technological development, along with evolving risks and benefits from large
scale data use, Novo Holdings has developed a policy on how to use
and handle data in an ethical way. Read more at: novoholdings_policyon-data-ethic.pdf
Novo Nordisk A/S

Policy on data ethics
Section 99d of the Danish Financial Statements Act requires that Danish companies of a certain size report on their policy on data ethics.
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Group welcomes and promotes ethical
use of data. In 2020, the Novo Nordisk Foundation Group initiated the
work on formulating policies on data ethics for each of companies in
the group. In 2023, the focus was on training to secure compliance with
the principles of the policies.

In 2021, data ethics principles were enhanced and will be implemented
through policies and trainings across the organisation in 2023. The
data ethics principles support ethical decision-making when using data
across the value chain. The integration of data protection and human
rights risks into the business ethics risk management processes has
been further strengthened. Read more on: Data ethics | Novo Nordisk
data ethics principles.
Novozymes A/S

Novo Nordisk Foundation
The Novo Nordisk Foundation complies with both Danish and EU law
on data and privacy protection. In addition, the Foundation recognises
that the fast pace of technological development, along with evolving
risks and benefits from large scale data use, requires thoughtful and responsible decision-making where existing laws and regulations do not
necessarily provide clear ethical guidance. The Foundation has developed a policy on data ethics based on six principles for how to handle

Novozymes has adopted a policy, which sets the overall principles for
the ethical management of data in Novozymes and supplements our
general commitment to integrity and compliance. In 2023, the focus
has been on how to use Artificial Intelligence (AI) in an ethical way. Link
to data ethics report 99d-Statutory-report-on-data-ethics-for-AnnualReport-2023.pdf (q4cdn.com)

106

Annual Report 2023

Table B: Sustainability indicators - Social footprints
Novo Nordisk Fonden
Indicators
2023 2022 2021

Novo Holdings A/S
2023 2022 2021

Novo Nordisk A/S
2023
2022
2021

2023

Novozymes A/S
2022
2021

Employees
Number of employees 31.12
Average number of employees in the year (FTE) (1)
Gender (Women %)
- Board of Directors
- Committee members (2)
- Management
- All employees
Country of origin (%)
- Denmark
- European Union other than
Denmark
- Outside the European Union
Human capital
Sick leave (%)
Turnover (%)
Employee satisfaction (3)
Research & Development
Number of journal articles (4), (7)
Number of patents and patents applications (5)
Number of R&D personnel (6)
PhD students
Post Doc fellows

202

162

131

179

152

132 64,319 55,185 48,478

6,756

6,781

6,527

201

160

131

166

93

89 63,370 51,046 46,171

6,805

6,690

6,240

29
40
37
60

22
42
29
60

33
41
38
59

33
33
41

25
22
36

14
29
38

50
46
49

46
44
49

33
43
49

33
36
40

29
33
39

29
33
38

77

81

89

50

52

61

45

42

35

43

43

43

13

11

8

12

9

9

7

8

11

3

2

2

10

7

3

38

39

30

48

50

49

54

55

55

2
9
91

2
12
89

2
8
91

1
5
94

1
11
89

0
11
96

6
86

8
85

11
84

3
11
84

3
11
83

2
12
82

4377

4,097

4,130

-

-

-

499

437

427

291

229

-

-

- 18,787 18,225 17,827

9,654
1,802
1,873

9,367
1,701
1,657

6,552
1,183
970

-

-

-

59
16,99
7
1,279
-

67

347

51
17,63
8
1,208
-

7,924
-

8,426
-

6,867
-

16,496
1,330
-

Novo Nordisk Foundation calculates the number of employees as full-time equivalents (FTEs). For Novo Holdings the number of full-time equivalents does not include
Global subsidiary companies.
(2)
Committee members are both internal experts and externals used for peer review.
(3)
In 2021, the engagement survey conducted in both Novo Nordisk and in the Novo Nordisk Foundation was entirely redesigned to support the strategic goals of the organisations. As a result, comparison to previous surveys is not possible. In 2021, Novo Holdings conducted a company culture survey and not an engagement survey, hence the
results cannot be compared with previous results.
(4)
Number of journal and review articles reported by grant recipients of the Novo Nordisk Foundation.
(5)
Number of patents and patent applications reported by grant recipients of the Novo Nordisk Foundation. Counted on NNF and centres from 2013 and onwards. The source
Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes A/S number of patents and patents applicants has been changed to Digital Science - Dimensions compared to last year increasing the
coverage in jurisdictions and the resulting number shown.
(6)
Employees partly or fully financed by grants from the Novo Nordisk Foundation.
(7)
The yearly number of publications includes an estimation of the total number of publications reported in subsequent years.
(1)

107

Annual Report 2023

Table C: Sustainability indicators - Environmental footprints
Novo Nordisk Fonden(9)
Novo Holdings A/S(15)
Indicators
2023
2022
2021 2023
2022
2021
Energy (1,000 GJ)
3
3
3
2
3
2
Renewable en100
100
100
100
ergy (%)
CO2 equivalent emission
(1,000 tonnes) (8)
Scope 1 Total
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.03
Scope 2 Total (14)
0.07
0.10
0.24
0.17
Purchased goods
2.76
2.01
3.82
4.74
and services
Fuel and energy
0.04
0.05
0.10
0.07
related activities
Upstream transportation and distribution
Waste generated
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
in operations
Business travel
1.72
2.51
3.37
3.70
Capital goods
Employee com0.11
0.10
0.09
0.11
muting
End-of-life treatment of sold
products
Downstream
transportation and
distribution
Downstream in- N/A(17) 314.48
vestment (16)
Scope 3 total
4.65
4.69
7.40 323.11
Total scope
4.73
4.80
7.67 323.28
1+2+3 emission
Water (1.000 m3)
Water consumed
1
1
1
1
1
1
Waste
Waste (1.000
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.05
0.03
0.02
tonnes)
Waste recyclable
99
98
99
98
(%)

Novo Nordisk A/S
2023
2022
2021
3,784
3,677
3,387

Novozymes A/S
2023
2022
2021
4,396
4,840
4,475

100 (12)

100 (12)

100 (12)

51 (12)

50 (12)

42 (12)

78
15

76
16

77
16

40
103

46
115

43
175

2,067

1,473

-

477

545

510

56

55

-

100

109

108

113

123

71

53

67

59

6

5

-

7

7

6

83
1,315

73
614

10
-

7
-

6
-

1
-

43

35

-

-

-

-

3

3

-

-

-

-

52

37

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

3,738

2,418

-

644

734

684

3,831

2,510

-

787

895

902

4,150

3,918

3,368

7,793

8,720

7,998

189 (10)

214 (10)

181 (10)

15 (11)

21 (11)

15 (11)

78 (10)

84 (10)

-

74 (13)

63 (13)

62 (13)

(8)
Scope 1: Direct GHG emissions that occur from sources controlled or owned by an organisation. Scope 2: indirect GHG emission associated with purchased energy. Scope 3:
All other GHG emissions resulting from activities not owned or controlled by the company, but which form part of the value chain.
(9)
Office at Tuborg Havnevej 19, DK-2900 Hellerup. Consumption is based on invoices from suppliers.
(10)
Waste from production sites.
(11)
Solid waste, excluding biomass where 99% is recycled.
(12)
Share of renewable power for production sites
(13)
Percentage of solid waste (non-biomass waste) recycled
(14)
Market based approach.
(15)
Energy, water and waste metrics are for Tuborg Havnevej, 19, DK-2900 Hellerup. CO2 emissions cover Novo Holdings locations globally.
(16)
Equity share approach. Calculations include Novo Nordisk A/S and Novozymes A/S.
(17)
Not available at time of reporting.

Annual Report 2023

108

